
It can be seen that far from being an aggregate of arbitrary, spontaneous (I would say unconsidered) opinions arising mechanically from imitation, or animated by a spirit of partiality, ijmac appears to have unity, an identity of unshakeable convictions which truth imposes upon all enlightened souls. We know just how much subjective conditions cause our personal views to differ, to the extent that they diverge too much. However, when it happens that in such conditions the intellectual effort of each person is deployed according to his own way of thinking and free from any foreign interference, reaching the same solution as everyone else, this can only be so because the solution appeared to each conscience with such clarity that it precluded any discussion. 

The infallibility of ijmac, under consideration here, cannot actually be attributed to either the thinkers themselves or to any particular text - since its authenticity may be refuted, or its interpretation considered in different ways - but to the reference to the well-established and deeply studied collection of Qur'anic and prophetic documents on which our thinkers have been able to base their judgement. 

4) Qiyiis Whereas the ?:ahirites, a purely exegetical School, preferred to keep to the three sources mentioned above: kitii.b, sunna and ijmii.c, the other Schools, authorising themselves on the example of the Companions of the Prophet and the opinion of the majority of their successors, accept a fourth and last source, namely qiyiis, or reasoning by analogy. Are we to believe that their doctrine tends to accord with that type of autonomous, rational legislation denied to communal decision and to the Prophet himself? Not at all. 

Firstly, by its very definition, this reasoning supposes the existence of a model case, to which one compares the new case; but the type-case must already be mentioned elsewhere: in the Qur'an, the adfth or ijmii.c. Moreover, the shared characteristic in both cases must either or the why of the legislation, the reason for which the solution of the original case was adopted. However, if this common characteristic was explicitly mentioned in the text, or is unanimously acknowledged as the reason for the original solution, there is no difficulty, even for the ?ahirite School, to make it the index, to see the necessary and sufficient condition of the earlier judgement. 

There is therefore no difficulty in generalising this statute and applying it whenever the established motivation can be found. However, in the case where this motivation, or causal link, can only be adduced through a subtle effort of reasoning, are we to understand it, with the conclusions that result, as being implied within the spirit of the revealed legislation? We suggest that the answer to this question must have various degrees. The reticence of the ?ahirite School at least constitutes a protection against the abuse of intellectual freedom of some jurists. 

The Malikite School, on the contrary, has gone further in the liberal sense. 

Referring to the example of the first Muslims, Imam Malik authorises this inductive reasoning, not only starting from a well-defined text, bringing the same solution to a particular problem which is analogous to the problem under scrutiny, but also starting from general processes to which the law has had recourse in innumerable matters more or less related to the question at hand, which together emerge as one certain idea: that such a type of good is an essential aim which the law seeks to realise by all means possible. The new case only presents us with another means, before being used when it appears in its turn, in order to realise the generic good, which Malik called al-mlaa al-mursala, or 'indeterminate good'. It is in virtue of this principle that this scholar was able to resolve a certain number of moral and legal problems in a rather original way, even though it clashed somewhat with the letter of the law. However far you search through the various currents of legal thought in Islam, one truth remains indubitable: It is that the ultimate goal for which all legislators aim in their various ways is to reach this unique source from which everyone far and wide must draw: the divine decision. This decision the Qur' an records first; the adlth then comment upon it and define it. If both texts are silent, qiyiis attempts to discover it in its deepest spirit and meaning; lastly ijmac intends to take it from all the evidence together. God alone is therefore the legislator; the others are but direct or indirect transmitters of His decree. 

As yet we still have not touched upon the deepest root of moral obligation in the Qur'an. Up to now, we have been able to bring natural moral law back to a kind of divine law, already implied within the very structure of human reason. 

We have then shown how this partial light is not sufficient to supply us with a law which is concrete, complete and universal, and shown the necessity, in order to obtain this threefold character, of having recourse to an authority which, transcending human beings, can enlighten them enough through a positive teaching which is sufficiently precise. This authority, which must be endowed with absolute consciousness and infinite light, can only be that of the Perfect Being. We have finally reduced all sources of this positive law to one unique source, and all commandments to one commandment, whether explicitly or implicitly expressed: that of God. 

However, the Qur'an does not present this divine commandment as absolute power, sufficient in itself to establish the realm of duty for us. On the contrary, it is edifying to see with what care the Book often tries to attach its justification to each resolution of the law, and to each precept the moral value which constitutes the established benefit. When for instance, it invites us to accept any conciliatory move from our neighbour, even if it is not to our advantage, it supports this recommendation with this aphorism: reconciliation is better 4:128 In the same way, when it prescribes for us the duty to fill the measure and to weigh with fair scales, it adds: that is better and gives the best result 17:35 To justify the rule of modesty which asks men to lower their gaze and master their senses, it gives this explanation: that is purer for them 24:30 Having commanded us to examine a case well before judging it, it continues: in case you wrong others unwittingly 49:6 When it commands that debts should be recorded in writing, as well as the date of their repayment, it comments: doing that is more just in Allah's sight, more reliable as testimony, and the best way of avoiding doubt between you 2:282 Rather than us adding to the examples of particular commandments, it is enough to see how the Qur'an encourages us to strive for spiritual values and quality in general, rather than quantity: The bad and the good are not the same, even though the abundance of the bad may tempt you. 5:100 the garment of virtue is the best 7:26 he who has been given wisdom has been given great good 2:269 It even allows us to witness the fundamental principle which inspires all of the divine legislation, formulated thus: Allah does not command indecency. 7:28 Allah commands justice and doing good. 16:90 So, what we assumed to be the last link in the chain of references does not prove to be so. Divine reason does not hold the form of its verdict as the primary principle of moral obligation any more than human reason. It too claims reference to another criterion. It directs us back to the very essence of duty, to the quality of the action, to its intrinsic value. It is in its accord with this objective truth that the commandment justifies itself in our eyes; it is through this that it solicits our adherence, and it is upon this that it establishes its moral command. 

Only, we do not see for ourselves the profound character which constitutes the essence of the just and the good per se, whenever and wherever it appears. 

As with any essence, we do not see it directly and in its totality; we only catch a glimpse of it, thanks to this fragment of light, so limited in extent and intensity, which we contain in our nature. There is only one pure and unlimited light that can encompass it adequately and with complete certainty. 

And it is precisely for this reason that believers have the right to take divine reason as the most perfect moral guide which can direct them to it. It is therefore in the notion of value that the true source of obligation resides. It is the reason of reason, and the ultimate reference of morality. 

The characteristics of moral obligation Any law (whether it be physical, social, logical or anything else) necessarily and invariably rules all individuals who are subject to it, and the self-same individual in various circumstances, otherwise, that law would not be a law, which is to say a general and constant rule. Despite being of a very particular nature, the law of duty is nevertheless invested with this common characteristic: it is both universal and necessary. The universal charcteristic of moral law appears in the Qur'an with undeniable clarity. Not only do all of its commandments address to the whole of that which can be understood in a partial sense, but also the same rule, whether it is one of justice or of virtue in general, must always be applied to oneself as it is to others,to one's kin as it is to strangers, to the rich as it is to the poor,52 outside of the community as it is inside;whether it concerns a friend or an enemy.Even in cases where the text of the law does not contain a general term; even if it is given to suit a particular event, in principle it is held to be universal, which is to say that it can be extended to all analogous cases. That is what the Prophet stipulated.As long as the analogy is so clear that it is virtually identical, which is to say that so long as the two cases are differentiated only by negligibly individual characteristics (such as people, times and places), it is unanimously accepted that a judgement passed in the case of one person may be extended to all. The fiercest critics of qiyiis, Ibn .f:Iazm for example, uphold this principle and strongly defend it as a necessary consequence of the universality of the Prophet's mission and of the equality of all before the law. As we have seen, it is only when the characteristic shared by both is not concretely obvious and emerges only through an incisive rational process that the principle of reasoning through analogy becomes a source of controversy among different Muslim jurists. 

This is, however, only a detail which does not undermine the general principle. 

The universal nature of duty not only means that it extends to all individuals; it also implies that it can be applied to the various circumstances in which one individual may find themselves. This kind of universality is wrongly called absolute necessity. We shall see later how this term cannot strictly be applied to the Qur'anic notion of duty. Duty as it is established by the Qur'an is only imposed on mankind to the extent that it is possible; but it is necessary in this sense that it must not yield to our subjective states or our personal interests. The Qur'an tells us that it is the sceptics or those in whose hearts is a disease who obey the law only inasmuch as they profit by it; while those who have faith submit to it unconditionally.The Qur'an not only extols generosity which is shown both in times of comfort and of adversity,and courage which braves hunger, thirst and tiredness, but it also severely condemns those who allow such inconveniences to prevent them from carrying out their duty. When the divine law speaks, as it tells us in its own terms, it is not for any man or woman of the believers to have any choice about it. Can any stronger expression be found to establish the necessity with which duty is imposed? We must not, however, confuse this expression with either of the other two meanings of the word necessity: moral necessity is different from both physical necessity and logical necessity. Physical law exercises over our bodies a constraint to which we submit, involuntarily and inevitably; moral law, on the other hand, supposes freedom of choice; it is an obligation, but does not constrain us physically. From the beginning it leaves us the choice (at the risk of a later reaction) of whether to observe it or violate it. It is the primordial rule that the Qur'an ceaselessly proclaims, as much for the duty of faith as for practical virtue. Thus, faced with duty, one has the choice de facto, but one does not have it de jure. Moral necessity is therefore not existential, but ideal. It must not be confused at all with logical necessity. That which is logically necessary impresses itself upon the mind as a given. We cannot fail to see what the evidence shows us. That which is morally obligatory imposes itself upon the will as something which does not yet exist, but which must be. It is the result of a judgement of value, not a judgement of reality. The realm of duty is thus presented with its own original characteristic. It constrains neither the senses, nor the intellect, but imposes itself solely upon the conscience. 

Kant, however, believed that he could trace immorality back to the absurd or the irrational. No unjust rule, he said, can be established as a universal law without leading to a contradiction, either within its very concept, or in the will which endeavours to elevate it to a universallevel. In considering some examples by which the German philosopher wished to illustrate his argument, Bergson stated that he could only adhere to it on condition that any of such concept be understood, not in its simple, material definition, but with the inclusion of its obligatory nature and all of its ethical conditions. Thus, he explains, it would be contradictory for someone to whom one had entrusted a deposit, with the express or tacit arrangement for it to be returned, to then keep it, since the deposit would no longer be a deposit. However, is it not evident that, even though it is so limited, Kant's thesis still remains unproven? We even say that it is impossible to prove, no matter what dialectical skills are used, because, from the fact that an engagement taken yesterday has been reneged upon today, there certainly results a contrast between two opposite positions, but hardly a contradiction in the real sense of the word. 'The engagement was to have been kept' is a de jure proposition. 'It was not' is a de facto proposition. What internal impossibility is there to uphold these two assertions? As long as the two terms of the opposition do not proceed from the same source and are not related to the same references; as long as the affirmation and negation do not fall simultaneously upon the same matter and in the same conditions, there cannot be any logical contradiction, unless a new terminology is invented. 

'Reason demands', yes, indeed it does, always. 'The senses agree or refuse', alas! but it is the law ... such is the eternal struggle between ideal and reality, between moral law and the law of nature. The best proof of their noncontradiction is that they function simultaneously; the contradictory being what is most obviously expelled from the realm of reality. Instead of using the term contradiction, whoever maintains calling things by their name will only say: 'It was an annoyance' or 'It was a disappointment'. An annoyance for the ideal which should permeate reality and which is prevented from doing so; a disappointment for moral consciences with their worthy expectations. 

We do not want to play with words. One may call this action by which a deposit becomes no longer a deposit whatever one chooses. The point which demonstrates that the moral fault does not reside in this simple alteration is that one ethical factor is enough to change its quality in order for it to be blameless (for example, a concession made by the owner to the trustee). 

Instead of the issue of turning back on the moral obligation to keep one's word after it has been accepted, let us now consider the promise of such a person who allows themselves, in an hour of need, to make a false promise. 

What exactly will happen when we convert this statement into a universal law? Without doubt, elevated to this level, the action by which a man permits someone to cheat others will compromise the one by which he does not want to be cheated himself. The opposition now seems to have been transported to the legal realm, but does this antagonism imply a real contradiction: wanting and not wanting to be cheated? We believe that this apparent opposition is only due to a certain equivocation in the term 'to want', which here plays a dual role, both active and affective. In effect, our will - in the proper sense of the word: the faculty to decide - may very well enjoy taking the risk of laying down a general order which can extend to affect that which we mistakenly call 'will' and which is nothing else than our sensitivity, or faculty to desire. It is in this way that a judge wants, and finds universally just, the punishment of the culprit, even if he would not like being punished himself, if he were similarly guilty. Or to take up again the example of the false promise, does not the very fact of allowing others to cheat imply that the astute liar believes he can frustrate their deceit and escape their trap, without having to change his view? But, they tell us, by removing the trust from the word that has been given, does not the principle of a false promise destroy the very idea of a promise, which assumes that it will be believed? It is easy to expose the contrivance by which several notions are forced into one. Despite that, it does not contradict the idea of a promise, either in its essence or in its existence, or in the possibility of it influencing people - since some will always believe anything - but only in the certainty of its outcome. This is far from a logical necessity. 

What is logically necessary presents itself to us as an analytical and static truth; it is the agreement of the idea with itself, whereas moral necessity is rather of a synthetic and dynamic order: it qualifies a relationship between two different realms; it is the progression of the idea towards its coming into being. This is certainly not to say that its essence is in itself sufficient for it actually to exist, as with Descartes' idea of the perfect being, since a moral concept cannot be applied in reality except by the activity of a free and voluntary agent. It is necessarily conceived by such an agent as a value worthy of being realised, inciting his will to bring it into being. In a word, it is the demand of a practical ideal claiming its right to exist. With this notion of practical value, we leave the realm of the general characteristics that all laws have in common, to pass on to the characteristics which are specific to moral law. 

Thanks to a remarkably penetrating mind, Kant well understood the great difference which radically separates the moral rule from all other practical rules. This difference resides in the Aristotelian idea of end and means: that which must be sought for itself, or for something else. This is an idea rich in possibilities which Kant has fortunately known how to utilise and which we also retain, while disengaging it from Kantian formalism. In effect, although the art of living, with its rules of skill and prudence, only seriously requires us to act from the motive of a desirable aim, moral law alone demands action for its own sake, in virtue of the intrinsic value it possesses. Only the command of duty can truly be called obligation; the other imperatives are just simple advice indicating the means to anyone who wishes to attain the end. 

We provisionally leave aside the question of whether man is ever able to view his duty in such an impartial light. We do not now place ourselves at the point of view of the agent and we will discuss the doctrine which makes this ideal purity of intention a strict duty. Like Kant, we only maintain that, since any consideration of the consequence is alien to the idea of duty, moral law as such hardly needs an extrinsic value to justify its command. In order to establish its authority, it is necessary and sufficient that action be presented as obligatory or good in itself, without taking any account of its result, be it pleasant or unpleasant. To replace one of these considerations with the other would be to reverse the order of things, and not to proceed as a moral philosopher. Nevertheless, it is true that an action can be at the same time just, useful and pleasant. It is not forbidden to the legislator to add to the justifications of his order, but then he no longer simply plays the role of a moralist: he adds others to his office, which are not always compatible. An expert educator may even have to resort to this procedure to ensure that his teaching is effective. This addition is all the more justified when it concerns the education of beginners, but in proportion to the progress that is accomplished, morality becomes more and more pure, until it can finally support itself. It seems that it is by this progressive method that the Qur'an has proceeded in its teaching of ethics. Parallel to this characteristic of moral obligation, as seen from a legislative point of view, we have to mention another characteristic, from the point of view of application: it is that a moral action never consists of a physical deed which is unconscious, involuntary or unintentional. Whereas legality is satisfied with the act itself, and with the dry letter, morality always requires its spirit.

Even without taking part in the famous debate among Muslim scholars concerning the absolute necessity to perform one's duty solely out of duty, it is undeniable that in Islam the sanctity of duty demands at least that one contemplate one's action before taking it. It is absolutely necessary that, at that moment, the mind adopts such an attitude that the act is not considered simply in its physical aspect, but expressly in regard to its obligatory characteristic. If not, an action which completely conforms to the letter of the law remains like an empty gesture, a profane object, without any moral value. So, the law of duty is characterised by the fact that it is a law of freedom and reason, of intrinsic value and is essentially spiritual in its activity. 

We shall now return to its general characteristics, which it shares with all other laws, in order to present them in their precise Qur'anic form. We have seen how, from the Qur'anic point of view, this law is necessary and universal; however, this does not make it absolutely unconditional. What are its conditions? There are three: one concerns human nature in general; another, the concrete reality of life; the third, the hierarchy of actions. 

A The possibility of action It might seem superfluous to emphasise the idea of the physical possibility of an action as a sine qua non condition of moral obligation. Not only does the conscience of the common man acknowledge as an innate truth that nobody is bound to perform what is impossible, but it is even stated in numerous Qur'anic passages, such as: Allah does not burden any soul with more than He has given it. 65:7 We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear. 6:152; 23:62 Allah does not burden ... (the same phrase) 2:286 The circumstances in which this last text was revealed can help us to determine the sense of this impossibility, which is considered to be incompatible with obligation. In an earlier verse, it is stated: Whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts, Allah will call you to account. 2:284 Holding to the letter of this general statement, the Companions of the Prophet believed that it applied to everything which occurred within the conscience: ideas, decisions, desires, dreams, fantasies, and so on. They immediately came pleading to the Prophet, deploring their inability to obey, saying: 'We are not masters of our involuntary thoughts or of our inner voice.' He replied to them: 'Do you mean that, like your predecessors, the people of the Book, you say: "We have heard but we disobey"? Say rather: "We have heard and we obey".' Then there a revelation explaining the text mentioned above: 'Obligation is only imposed on people according to their ability.' Thus they understood that the various states of the soul which do not submit to the will were not and could never be the direct object of an obligation, no more than are the reflexes, instincts, appetites and natural inclinations. This is why all imperatives relating to love and hate, fear or hope, have been interpreted in a rational manner by the commentators, in a way that links them to a previous action, the cause of these states, or a contiguous or later action, but never to anything involuntary. This is how the love for God, an emotional and involuntary state in itself, may be acquired through a voluntary act: the contemplation of the infinite goodness of the divine and the remembrance of the blessings that it bestows on us, for people are made in such a way that the services rendered to them determine their love for their benefactors. It is in this indirect sense that love of God is the object of a commandment in the adlth: 'Love God for the goodness that He never ceases to shower on you.'67 Loving our neighbour can also be determined through comparable methods or through even more appropriate practices, which we find in a beautiful example recommended by the Prophet: 'Forgive one another (or shake hands) and your resentments will disappear; exchange presents, so as to foster mutual friendship.' By contrast, the command, 'Do not become irritated or angry'seems to aim at the effects of this emotion, rather than its causes. What is meant is: do not allow yourself to be drawn into the unforeseen consequences of anger; resist urges pulling you the wrong way and redirect them elsewhere. In the face of irrefutable evidence one does not only give one's acquiescence to belief itself, which is not regarded as a derivative obligation, since it is given. This is why, in order to summarise all the pieces of advice concerning faith, the Qur'an gathers them all into one: engage in meditative reflection in solitude, or in the company of one other person, in other words, far from the influence of the crowd. Islamic history, however, has witnessed a prolonged debate between Ashcarites and Muctazilites concerning this question: can God not only place upon people an unbearable burden (taklzf mii Iii yutiiq), but even oblige them do the impossible (takllf al-muMI)? The strange thing is that, whereas the Muctazilites, who in principle give free rein to reason, defend the letter of the text here, the Ashcarites, who often carry the standard of Muslim orthodoxy (without always being, it must be acknowledged, its best representatives), take the opposite position and teach the possibility, even the legitimacy, for God to place upon us that which is beyond our strength, to oblige us to carry out that which cannot be done, even the absurd. The reason for this reversal of position will become easier to ascertain if we place the controversial point within each doctrinal framework. 

In Muctazilite thought, this position is linked to a rational system which seeks to reach, through reason alone, the very essence of the Supreme Being and the moral laws which inform His actions, as well as those which He imposes on us. What is more, once they know the divine laws, they deduce a whole succession of defined rules, from which God can never deviate. God is good, wise and just. So, they state, whatever is in itself incompatible with these attributes, or which we conceive as such in all certainty, must not, cannot, be done by God; whence the following rules, among others: God must not create anything without considering its useful ends for his creatures (ricayat al-ala); and out of two possible good actions, He must perform the better one (riciiyat al-la); God must not intervene in our voluntary actions, either to determine them or to prevent them; conversely, he must arm us with equal power over two opposites and allow us to choose freely between them; one who obeys must be rewarded by God; one who disobeys without repenting must be punished by God and not forgiven, otherwise, He would commit an injustice. Is it a question of the nature of our duties towards God, towards ourselves, or others? These necessarily proceed from the nature of good and evil; and we have virtually an innate knowledge of this nature. Even if God had not manifested His will in the Scriptures, if He had not revealed His commandments to His Messengers, we would have known them all the same, and would have been bound to follow them. The Scriptures and Messengers only confirm and explain what we know through reason. 

It was in order to counteract these great aspirations, this excessive confidence in human reason, that the Ashcarites undertook to combat the arguments of the Muctazilites, one by one. of course, this polemical spirit could sometimes lead them to commit the opposite abuses. Wishing to counter argument with argument, the Ashcarites at first failed to proceed on solid philosophical grounds, or in any case those that were less dangerous, from what might be called a negative position, which consisted of objecting to the arbitration of reason in these matters, given the incommensurability of the finite human mind with infinite things. But, on positive grounds, they failed to find any wiser a solution, a constructive and truly Qur'anic solution reconciling opposing attributes without neglecting or exaggerating any particular one. Thus it is that the Qur'an teaches us that Allah ordains whatever He wills.How is it possible to understand this statement in an absolutely arbitrary sense when He confirms elsewhere that: Allah will judge with justice. 40:20 Here are the same opposing attributes in a different form. In one text it is said: As for my punishment, I strike with it anyone I will 7:156 but in the same text we find: My mercy extends to all things 7:156 and in another text: Why should Allah punish you if you are thankful and have trust in Him? Allah is Responsive, Aware. 4:147 In the same way, when the Qur'an declares that God could cause the destruction of the human race, the just as well as the guilty/or that nothing can oppose the crushing burdens He places upon us, nor the harsh measures that He takes against us/is it not clear that the conditional form is rarely transformed into the present? One may even state that it will never happen, since: He has made mercy incumbent on Himself. 6:13 Instead of underlining divine omnipotence, which the Muctazilites had avoided emphasising; instead of making it comparative to divine wisdom, which the Muctazilites had highlighted, our ardent, but not very prudent, theoreticians virtually suppressed the latter in favour of the former, but while conserving it in name only. 

When we come across a well-arranged piece of work, perfectly organised, each part having its function within the whole; or when we see an action lead to good consequences, we have the habit of explaining these things by means of other things; of taking a connection in space or in time, a structural interdependence, or a historical sequence, for an intentional finality. 

Anthropomorphism! the Ashcarites say; this human interpretation does not apply to the providential order where, according to them, there is no finality at all. God does what He wills and is indifferent to any outcome. God does not will one thing in order to achieve another; He wills both by one and the same sovereign act. So be itl we say, but in spite of this aimless, unbalanced voluntarism, should they not acknowledge that the realm of the will and existence is more limited than that of possibility and omnipotence? Then, nothing prevents all that God creates or commands from being in conformity with the requirements of justice and goodness, even though He is not bound by them. 

In this particular case, we will be satisfied provided we are reassured that, if not de jure, then at least de facto, and following a constant and invariable law, God only obliges people according to their strength. 

The most reasonable of the Ashcarites understood this, but others went further, led by their love of polemics.They tried to find an ingenious means of establishing the obligation to do the impossible per se not only as a right of the divine power, but as an already accomplished fact. And with exemplary temerity, they claimed to find concrete examples of it in the Qur'an itself. This is their precious discovery: It is the case of certain unbelievers to whom the Qur'an had announced that they would die in a state of unbelief, despite all the efforts made to convert them.However, these people were nonetheless required to believe all revealed truths, including that of their everlasting unbelief, thus to do the impossible: (1)- because nothing which God knows to be impossible can ever exist; (2) - it would even be contradictory to believe this particular revelation, after which they would never believe, since that would be to believe and not to believe. Adding some comments to this twofold argument, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi presented it as the most irrefutable proof from which rationalism could never escape. However, supposing that its premises are true, we can only see various specious paralogisms in this twofold argument. The first argument, which is derived from divine foreknowledge, is based on a confusion between two clearly distinct metaphysical notions: the possible and the real, essence and existence. It is not because a thing does not exist or never will exist that it is impossible in itself. Science does not change the essence of things, any more than their reality. It copies it, reproduces it and expresses it. If all that God knows as inexistent is impossible, we must also, for the same reason, say that everything He knows as existent is necessary: what is then left in the universe for the exercise of the divine will? As for the second argument, it arises from a logical confusion between two types of propositions, one independent and the other subordinate. To believe and not to believe are indeed contradictory, supposing that all requisite identities have been established, but to believe in never believing is an actual fact for the one who does not believe; since he feels it within himself, he knows it through the most immediate and intimate experience. 

As all their attempts failed in the Qur'anic domain, our polemicists directed their search towards a wider, purely rational area; and they now wanted to demonstrate to us that the obligation to do the impossible, far from being an isolated case in divine legislation, is a general rule from a certain point of view. 

In order to defend human freedom, their adversaries, the Muctazilites, placed that freedom prior to the action, in that moment when everyone experiences their dual power to act or to refrain. The Ashcarites objected that before acting, power is only virtual, whereas real power is contemporaneous to the action;now this power only ever affects these two contrasts alternately. While occupied with one, the other remains impossible, as long as the first is in the process of being enacted. He who disobeys an order and applies his activities elsewhere is therefore incapable of obeying it while his is disobeying it; however, at the very same time, he is obliged to carry out his duty. On this account, cases that are said to be exceptional, where the aim of the obligation is unrealisable, are at least as numerous as regular cases. 

But who cannot see that this is pure sophistry. Nobody has ever dreamed of interpreting an order given to someone who is disobeying it as an obligation to be obeyed at the same time as they are disobeying it. It is very clear that it is simply a matter of inviting them to stop their opposition and to replace their activity with one that is moral. If some insist on calling such an action impossible, that is only a false problem. Although they do not fall into agreement on the definition of the word, the two opposite camps find themselves in agreement on the facts themselves - and the principle that we defend remains intact. 

B Gentle practice Everything which cannot be subject, either directly or indirectly, to our power has now been eliminated from the realm of obligation. This elimination cannot only be a part of Islamic ethics; it must constitute the characteristic that is common to all just and reasonable ethics, more particularly to all revealed ethics, since the contrary is evidently incompatible with divine justice and wisdom. The purport of the texts cited above only confirms this point. In effect, the texts present this condition in such a categorical and universal way that we are entitled to interpret them as the statement of a law which God made for Himself, and which is applicable to all human beings at all times. 

Here now are other texts which not only exclude anything from Islamic law which is absolutely impossible, but also any burden which would normally be unbearable, and any difficulty which would exhaust human strength, let alone be beyond it. The Qur'an declares: Allah desires ease for you; He does not desire difficulty for you. 2:185 He has selected you and not placed any constraint upon your religion. 22:76 Allah desires to make things lighter for you. Man was created weak. 4:28 We have only sent you as a mercy to all the worlds. 21:106 We hear in these words a very new tone. Whereas the first condition, possibility, had been presented as an eternal truth, independent of space and time, we only find here moderate statements introducing this second characteristic, gentleness, as a historical fact attached to the community to whom the message is addressed, the followers of Islam. If this is not to say that it is a specifically Islamic characteristic, at least the systematic absence of a general statement on this subject suggests the idea that it is not common to all revealed laws. Now this idea, which can only be deduced here by the inference of the contrast in style, appears clearly expressed elsewhere: Our Lord, do not place on us a load like the one You placed on those before us. 2:286 Therefore, there was a heavy burden imposed in a previous revelation. In which religion? What was this burden? Commentators give several examples regarding the second point, but this is not the place to verify their historical value. Regarding the first point, the expressions that some of them have used allow us to understand that it concerns all the previous religions, from which Islam is detached by a kind of mysterious privilege. If we abide by the instructions of the Qur'an, we believe we may be able to give a more reliable and definite answer to these two questions. 

In the middle of a dialogue which the Qur'an reports as having occurred between God and Moses following the sudden death that struck seventy Israelites on Mount Sinai, we notice a sentence very similar to the one with which we are presently concerned, giving it all the more an explanatory value, as it uses the same word as ours: My mercy extends to all things but I will prescribe it for those ... who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet ... who relieves them of their heavy loads and the chains which were around them. 7:156-7 The people of Israel and the jewish religion can therefore serve as an example in order to clarify the text in question, but to what extent? Are we to consider the two texts as co-extensive or, on the contrary, should we delve further back in history and, extending this example to former religions, conclude with the privilege of Islam on this point? Our position is clearly unfavourable towards this last hypothesis, for the following reasons. 

First, one cannot describe as burdensome a religion such as that of Abraham, to which Islam ceaselessly appeals and to which the Qur' an attributes the same characteristic of mercy.Second, according to the Qur'anic passages themselves, the difficulties inflicted on the people of Israel (such as the Sabbath and the prohibition of certain foods) were not part of the original religion. They were later commands, in order to punish them for their bad conduct: The Sabbath was only enjoined on those who differed about it. 16:124 Because of wrongdoing on the part of the jews, We made unlawful for them some good things which had previously been lawful for them. 4:160 The nature of the forbidden foods, to which this passage alludes, is explained in detail in another passage of Sura 6, ending with this conclusion: that is how We repaid them for their insolence. 6:147 Therefore Islam only re-established things in their normal order, which, according to the Qur'an, is the mission that jesus was commissioned partially to fulfil. Finally, in the third place, it cannot easily be understood how divine goodness should, from the very beginning, wish to establish an institution that would weigh so heavily on man, this feeble creature, and that would be so difficult as to make him groan under the weight of its burden, as the Arabic word 'ir' signifies. At the most, according to some confessions, we might speak of a relative difficulty in performing certain duties, or of an extended margin of freedom of initiative or freedom of choice. Whatever it is, we will not expand too much on this subject, which demands a more detailed comparative study and we now return to our starting point in order to see, through several examples, certain aspects of this practical gentleness which accompanies Qur'anic imperatives. 

One of the first aspects consists of the fact that, far from prescribing excessive zeal in pious behaviour, such as spending the night in prayer, the Qur'an discourages it and indicates that it has several disadvantages. We know that at the beginning of his mission, the Prophet was requested to spend a greater part of the night in praying and reciting the Qur' an;that, following his example, several of his Companions took up the custom of doing the same.