Let us now make this journey again in its three successive stages in order to examine its merits. 

a) First we ask if there really exists a necessary connection between universality and morality? Is it true that the necessary and sufficient condition for attributing a moral characteristic to a rule is that it should have the potential to become a universal law? Is it also true that 'if a rule does not generally withstand the test of the form of a natural law, it is morally impossible'?If one is to believe our author, this double criterion contains 'the canon which allows us to evaluate our actions in general'and the means of self-instruction which is 'the quickest, since it is infallible'.'With this pair of compasses in hand, one has, in every case that arises, all the means necessary to distinguish between that which is good and that which is bad, that which conforms to and that which is contrary to duty.'It does not require too much discernment to see how much the first part of this criterion brings extremely diverse values together within the same concept, from duty to that which is completely the opposite, including actions which are either neutral or doubtful. Indeed, with the exception of certain kinds of behaviour which man would not find acceptable if done in return to him, everything else must seem to him to constitute faultless behaviour, whose rules can be converted into a universal law, commencing with the rule that the decent man makes for himself as a part of his daily life: to follow his innocent inclinations, which is to say those whose satisfaction is clearly permissible. In this way, the act which is morally good and the act which is neutral become indistinguishable within the concept of 'a possible universal law', and duty is brought down to the level of that which is simply allowed, because it is one thing to say that a law must be made universal, but another to say that a law can be so. The Kantian formulation, like the 'vulgar' statement to which it appeals, is incapable of providing the difference between an obligatory act and one that is not forbidden. However, it is known with what care Kant distinguished two categories of rules concerning duty (for instance, doing good to others): one which merely commands conformity to duty (for whatever reason: a kind personality, vanity or self-interest), and one which also demands that it be determined by the idea of duty. Now it is clear that the criterion of 'possible', even 'necessary', universality does not take into account such an extremely important distinction, which leads to a second confusion: between morality and legality. The most unfortunate confusion is that which his so-called 'touchstone' may introduce in the individual conscience, by granting it the right to declare any action morally good which it willingly elevates to the universal, even if it were the most reprehensible, either according to common wisdom or at least according to Kantian wisdom itself. If we examine the feelings of those who make fairly serious derogations to moral law (such as a doctor who lies to a patient in order to bring him back to health, a philanthropist who tells a white lie to save a life, or the sensitive man who prefers to commit suicide rather than to live with dishonour), do they not give their rules the value of a universal law, before they are applied to anyone placed in the same conditions as themselves? Well! Would a cynic who indulges in the basest debauchery find any objection if everybody followed his example? Are there not others who would establish nudism and all its immoral consequences as a universal law? Conversely, it is the rules which cannot be elevated to the universal without contradicting themselves, or compromising human nature, which nevertheless we cannot accuse of immorality. Suppose a man makes it a rule to attain a stage of moral perfection that nobody has reached before. Not only would such an idea be completely destroyed if it were universalised, but also if it were even just slightly extended, for then a higher stage would no longer be a higher stage. Is this a reason for qualifying the rule as immoral? Here is another example: someone who is celibate. Let one whole generation enforce the obligation not to marry and the last living person of this generation will inevitably spell the end of humanity. Can one declare the rule of celibacy, so praised in Christianity, to be a crime? What would Kant himself have thought? The parallelism of the universal and the moral is broken, both in its positive and negative aspects. However, it does remain true, at least, that there exists a certain necessary relationship between the obligatory and the universal, a unilateral relation, the meaning and import of which we shall explain later. 

b) Kant does not limit himself to establishing the universality of our duties as a concrete, empirical and contingent fact. Nor is he content with a semiabstraction that makes human reason a faculty of the universal. Rather, he goes still higher, to capture the very essence of practical reason itself and he presents this fundamental law of pure reason as an inflexible necessity, not of any particular rule 'determined for certain actions', but of a universal law in general.He asserts that moral law must be in the form of a law in general, in the most abstract universality, and not in any other form, if duty is not to be a 'chimerical concept'. Kant states that he was not led to his formalism by any philosophical need for abstraction or by any imitation of Aristotle's logical formalism, but by moral considerations of the highest importance, by the very logic of morality, because, he says, if the moral value of the action does not reside in the results expected, or in its affinity with our inclinations, but in its relationship with the law; and if elsewhere this law is an a priori fact of reason, of this faculty which is autonomous and independent of the faculty of the senses, one must set aside both empiricism, which sees good consisting in useful consequences, and mysticism, which wanders in the transcendent, and keep to rationalism, which alone is appropriate for moral concepts.We can agree with him so far. Now, he adds, since I have deprived the will of all impulses and results, there only remains universal conformity with the law in general,which alone must serve as the guiding principle. In other words, if matter, which is the object of the will, were a determining principle, the will would be subject to an empirical condition, 'whereas, by removing all matter through the process of abstraction, only form remains'. In our opinion, here lies the equivocation and lack of rigour by which this argument has left a gap between the premises and the conclusion; for, when one has removed impulses from the senses, and other pragmatic considerations, one has not exhausted all the possible ways to reach pure form. Can there not be seen a middle ground between the matter rejected and the form that has been chosen? It is neither matter as 'object of desire', subordinated to personal experience, which is variable for everyone, nor form, which is entirely empty and devoid of all content; instead, it is a thinkable concept, an object of understanding, acknowledged a priori, imposing itself upon everyone through the representation of its intrinsic value. Would this not have escaped the evils of empiricism while preventing itself from becoming lost in formalism? By a sort of logical need, it is true, we impose a universal form on all our rules, in order to make them pass for moral laws. We cannot accept that an action should be obligatory for some and not for others placed in similar circumstances. It offends reason; but this necessary link between matter and form is only one aspect: every duty is universaL but the opposite is not true. This is because, in order to establish this relationship, moral judgement begins by perceiving within the action a value in itself which through its internal logic tends to expand; a value of a particular nature, both practicable and accessible to all individuals. Any way of behaving which does not fulfil this dual condition cannot be a moral law. It is what it is, except for a duty; but it is not necessarily a crime; it may be an optional action (such as celibacy), or the most meritorious action (the sublime heroism of a superman). Just because divine virtue is the highest moral value that does not mean that it is a universal law for all reasonable beings. If this is so -that is to say, if not all values have the ability to take the form of a universal law, and we have to choose from among them the one whose very nature demands this universality - all the more reason that the only logical possibility for any rule to fit this abstract formula is far from providing us with the criterion of moral good. The consideration of a law's universality hardly precludes any consideration of its legitimacy. Now we maintain that, if, in order to decide whether a rule is legitimate, one were content to consider the pure idea of law in general, without examining its content and meaning, it would be impossible to establish that one practice were moral and another were not, the virtue any more than the vice. Kant acknowledges that something which can be used for good or evil is not good absolutely. Is this not very much the case with formalism? The universal form is only a mould in which one can bake either a cake or a brick. 

The great paradox of the Kantian doctrine is that it holds something which is only derivative as a principal characteristic. For Kant, it is the formal law which is the foundation of good, rather than good which serves as its foundation. This position, which is the opposite of that of the Qur'an, as we have seen, is determined in Kant's thought by the very same paralogism which we have just rejected. 'If the concept of good is not derived from an anterior law', he tells us, 'but serves as its foundation, then it can only be the concept of something to be desired.'We believe that, on the contrary, it is not because a law is universal that it can be judged as moral. It is because it is established as just that it must be universalised. Why do we seek universal peace, if it is not because we think that it is necessary for the happy development, for the very existence, of humanity? Suppose, instead, that the weakest must disappear in order to leave space for the fittest: our rule will change instantly, and then the only advice that a moralist should give us is to engage in universal war. Universality only translates in extensive terms that which is first given in the form of a comprehensive essence. In the moral order, as in the order of logic, necessity is the justification for universality, which must, therefore, precede it in the jurist's mind; and moral necessity proceeds from an internal value, not from an external form. 

This reversed conception of the relationship between virtue and the law is merely the transposition onto a metaphysical plane of the doctrine of theological voluntarism, according to which God does not command something because it is intrinsically just; that which He ordains is just only because He has ordained it. It is only a change in vocabulary. Where theologians say: God's supreme command, Kant says: the categorical imperative of pure reason. 

There is this difference, however: the theologians who support this view have a guarantee in divine perfection against unjust commands. What guarantee do we have with this abstract concept of transcendental reason, unless it is identified with divine reason? Do not mistake our thinking. We do discern several aspects within Kantian formalism, since the law of pure reason serves many uses: it is both an objective principle which determines an action and its objects (both good and evil), and a subjective principle (a motivation) which compels the will to obey.We have no difficulty with this last point; on the contrary, we acknowledge that the pure form of the law is perfectly capable of acting on moral conscience. To perform one's duty because it is a duty, without being concerned about the moral good at which it aims: such is the definition of an absolutely devoted will. We shall show that this is the ideal of Qur'anic ethics. You do not ask the doctor whom you trust why he prescribes what he does; any discussion here would be akin to suspicion. Is it the same when it is a matter, not of acting but of judging, evaluating, or prescribing? Can the external form of a law in general act as a principle oflegislation on good and evil? To say that the sole idea of a universal obligation is enough to inform us exactly about the best ways of behaving - this is beyond us. A reason which commands us to obey a law is arbitrary and tyrannical. It is not reasonable if it does not presuppose perfect harmony between that law and the ideal of justice. Kant has thus confused and treated in the same way two very separate aspects of moral conscience: 1. the moment where it is still a matter of instituting the law; 2. 

that where it concerns the execution of a law that is already established. In other words, obligation and intention, ethics and morality. 

c) Universal duty! We agree with it; but we still have to distinguish several different degrees of universality. There are as many concepts as there is extension: paternal, maternal, marital and filial duty; the duties of a leader, a friend, a citizen, a person; the duty to act, the duty to think, the duty to love. Can one legitimately grant all these terms the same influence over every subject and every object, in such a way as to make them drop their respective barriers and overlap one another? Are we authorised to tell a leader to treat his superiors in the same way as his subordinates, or a husband to treat every woman in the world as his own wife, and vice versa? Beyond its limits, every duty ceases to be a duty and may even become a crime. Thus, it always concerns a relative universal, the extension of which can only be defined by the function of the nature of its constitutive elements and from the entire range of appropriate conditions. Dividing duties and defining them is the essential work of a proper moralist. The question is how to proceed. Starting from the absolute can one arrive at the relative without any extraneous borrowing? How can one determine - with the outline of a picture - the colours and all the details that the artist puts in? How can a pure grammarian explain the meaning of the essence of a discourse and the nuances of style? To want to turn ethics into mathematics, into even more than mathematics - what a paradox! It is impossible to deduce all geometrical theorems from a single principle; how can one succeed any better in the science of behaviour? Thus, for lack of a rigorous deduction, which is impossible in this case; rather, with Kant, we witness quite an ingenious reconciliation between form and matter, a kind of adaptation whose aim is to justify, on the one hand, the same rules of common morality, having detached them from their religious or metaphysical roots, and on the other, certain personal views which he adopts on the subject of the virtuous life. We do not dispute that sincere consciences can come together, in the Kantian manner, to examine the moral ideal. If, however, we examine some of these derivative rules in their relationship with his prime principle, they appear to us either to be devoid of a necessary link, or in poor agreement with it. 

Devoid of a necessary link: this is the rule which prescribes respect for humanity, for others as for ourselves, treating the human being as an end in himself. One may ask why pure reason, absolute and autonomous mistress as she is, feels this necessity to respect something other than herself. Is it reasonable to consider as an end that which is only partially so: this mixed nature, made of matter and spirit, more fundamentally sensual than rational? This point does not seem to have entirely escaped the Kantian mind; and it is probably why he restricted his rule to demanding that the human being be treated, not uniquely, but 'at the same time' as an end. Unfortunately, this intellectual rigour did not slacken until he came to the definition of practical duty, in this respect. The logic of the duality of human nature would have had to establish a distinction not only between being a person and an individual, between that which we have in common and that which belongs to each human being, but also between the rights of reason and the needs of the body. 

Kant agrees with everyone else that human beings have the right to personal safety, and the strict duty not to violate someone else's body, or their possessions; he forbids slavery and servitude in all its forms. The effort of refining his thinking was not made in order to utter banalities which are too great to fit his principle. Can there not be seen here something more in the conclusion than in the premises? If respect can and must extend to man's sensible element, why deny it to him in other aspects? Why is it permitted to treat animals as objects, domesticating them and killing them without scruple? Other considerations that are irrelevant to pure logic must without doubt have been present in Kant's mind for him to have integrated this unbalanced process into his conclusions, sometimes in order to expand them, or sometimes to restrict them. 

In poor agreement with the principle, such as when he forbids us to allow anyone to encroach upon our rights. Either the words have lost their meaning, or a right such as it is does not constitute a duty towards the one who possesses it, but towards others. If it is truly my right, then I am free to insist on it or to delegate it to whomsoever I wish. of course, through a kind of division of the self, as an individual subject, I have to defend my right insofar as I am a human being, insofar as I am the trustee of this sacred principle of humanity, but besides the duty of justice, there is that of charity. Should it not also be applied universally? Charity implies, with all the more reason, forgiveness and tolerance; on that account, in commanding us to love our enemies, Christian ethics was much more faithful to the principle of universal duty than Kantian ethics. 

We witness here a tacit acknowledgement that universality cannot be granted to one duty without destroying that of an opposing duty. Actually, the unconditional, categorical imperative cannot be conceived strictly according to the word, which is to say in an absolute fashion, unlimited either by experience or by understanding, unless it is accepted as a unique duty. Since there is, and there must be, a plurality of duties, two cases are possible: either both imperatives will agree, without violating each other, or each one can extend not only to neutralise, but also to oppose the other. 

In the first case, there is no practical difficulty. For instance, we must not lie and we must not kill: two duties which are perfectly compatible and can always go together. Certainly, it is not necessary that they are always imposed simultaneously, one concerning words, the other concerning deeds; but the limits assigned to each of them are not imposed upon them from the outside, but by their very content and the analysis of their own particular concepts, a task which is suitable for the exercise of human understanding, independently of any empirical element. It is in the case of conflicting duties that the most serious difficulties arise. Here are some examples: we have to tell the truth and be polite towards others; what are we to do when speaking the hard truth would be hurtful? I must keep my word, but what happens if I discover that the help I had promised would be given at the expense of a blatant injustice? I must not lie and it is also forbidden for me to abandon a soul I could save; what am I to do when the truth exposes a third person who is innocent? If I tell the truth in such a case, at the cost of someone's life, is it a praiseworthy, honourable action, or one of blameworthy selfishness? If I permit myself to lie in order to save a human life, do I have contempt for myself or do I sacrifice myself? If I attempt a compromise by using an equivocal expression, do I promote virtue, or, on the contrary, compromise it, since I would intend to allow the aggressor to believe the wrong meaning, and thus while avoiding the letter of the lie, I would keep to its spirit. 

The situation can clearly be seen. Here, a generalisation of two imperatives, even if it is conceptual, inevitably leads to their mutual infringement, contradiction and annihilation. From this comes the absolute necessity of narrowing the field of application for one of them, in order to allow space for the other. 

But which one? Are we allowed to privilege one over the other, arbitrarily? How do we confer upon them the equal right to existence without beginning to grant them equal value? Now, it is not unacceptable to give equal status to the indispensable, the necessary and the superfluous, or to what is the most urgent and the least, or existence and perfection. The task of the moralist does not come to an end when he has drawn up a list of duties; he still has to establish a hierarchy of values. And even supposing this order is established, it will never remain definitive, since it is essentially relative; because that which is indispensable in one case may become secondary in another, or even superfluous in a third. Thus, when danger threatens, the most precious goods are sacrificed to save a life, but life is sacrificed to save honour. 

It is in connection with actual reality that the value most worthy to be chosen is defined; it is in nature that one can trace with precision a line of demarcation between different duties, a line which is unstable and always subject to modification. In this way, in order to determine the duty of a given moment, the last word will be reserved for each person's own judgement, maybe even to what is called their sixth sense. 

We now see how the Kantian doctrine is left behind on two counts, and with that we are transported to the other side of the argument. 

Rauh With regard to the opposite extremes to the Kantian doctrine, which attributes all legislative power to transcendental reason, other doctrines have upheld the cause of the freedom of the empirical self. This opposition finds its most striking, indeed its most repulsive expression, in Guyau or Nietzsche, who have respectively reduced morality to a feeling for beauty or a living will. 

From this latter point of view, moral value does not exist already in the order of eternal things; it is a human creation through which man goes beyond himself to become the superman. 

Without pushing this revolutionary idea to its limit, which tends to remove completely the idea of obligation and with that, ethics itself; and whilst acknowledging the transcendence of the idea of duty in relation to the individual, the French philosopher, Frederic Rauh, meanwhile posited that each individual was the author of their own rules. One can say, without fear of being paradoxical, that, despite the distance that separates them, this thought meets - even coincides in a certain measure - with that of Kant. They only retain the notion of duty in a general sense, which does not include particular commands. However, after this coinciding starting point, the two views immediately begin to diverge. Whereas the German philosopher glides through the sky of logic, only gradually descending towards concrete reality, and even then with great reserve, the author of Experience morale rushes hurriedly towards the psychological realm. We have seen how, departing from the idea that it is the essence of any good which is of value for all wills, Kant had tried to create commands from this abstract principle that were less abstract, and from these a few rules that were still more concrete. Having discovered these commands, he encapsulated them forever within a rigid and immobile framework, isolated from each other, like Leibnitzian monads. The problem of conflicting duties never arose for him, since everything passed before his eyes as if each action had to be determined by one and only one rule. 

Rauh was more correct when he declared that no abstract rule is able to rule concrete reality by itself, in the same way that it is impossible to determine a point on a map without referring to several other points, or to explain a word in a text without taking the context into account; in the same way that the art of medicine cannot guarantee the efficacy of a medicine without taking into account the sick person's state and the course of the illness; or in the same way that the moralist cannot remove human behaviour which is essentially spatio-temporal from the effects of space and time. Our action is a real creation which is destined to take place in the real world. Therefore, it is not enough for it to be logically possible; it must be practically demonstrable; it must find its place amid the facts which surround it, in such a way that it is neither hindered by the events which precede it, nor negated by those which follow it. Thus, before we make any decision, we have no option but to inform ourselves of its objective reality, not only in the course of its present development but also in its history and its future. And that is not all: it is also necessary to take into account, at the same time, the diversity of mental factors which determine our reaction to nature. In multiplying one series of factors by the other, the result which we obtain for each new case is always an original product. Add the irreversibility of time and you come to the unequivocal conclusion that two moments in history can never be identical. This demonstrates the relative character of the ethical life. 

However, our philosopher, who knew how to avoid the Kantian error, was not able to prevent himself from falling into the reverse trap. According to his way of teaching ethics, everything happens as if the dissimilarity of two moments in life excluded their resemblance and did not allow anything in common between them; as if, besides the individual element, there was no place for a generic element; as if, behind everything that happens, nothing was nothing enduring. This is why he invites us to concentrate our attention on the temporary; he overtly encourages us to free ourselves from principles and ideals. Instead of submitting to them, we should ceaselessly put them to the test.Hence, not only must everyone legislate on his own duty according to his temperament, vocation and aspirations, but each person must constantly call his own rules into question, at every moment demolishing whatever they have only just built the previous moment. Do we not risk caprice and arbitrariness when we abandon ourselves to such an anarchic life? But this is not the most important point: we must question ourselves about the very principle that experience has the power to guide the conscience. 

Experience prefers facts, whereas conscience feeds on values. By what sort of magical operation can we turn facts into values? Rauh himself acknowledges that a value judgement can never be made from a simple judgement of reality, no matter in what form this reality is presented, whether objective or subjective, simple or complex, in the past, present or future. 

Concerning the past and present, all that we can gather from our experimental inquiry can be summed up in the simple observation that a particular act has always been followed by a particular result. We record the fact, we take action upon it, nothing else. No doubt, when we judge whether the effect was good or evil, we are inclined, even well-placed to judge the same about the action which has caused it. But what actually enables us to judge the effect? If our experience results in an appreciative judgement, if it 'emerges', then it is not the origin of this judgement, but only the circumstance. Its having happened does not mean that it should please or displease us. Even if there is a natural relationship between the two judgements it is still necessary to make an important distinction here: our estimative judgement itself is an assessable reality, a mental fact which arises out of experience, since it falls within the category of internal observation. 

However, the object of this judgement is a value, which by definition escapes any experience and is infinitely beyond it. Experience only attempts to approach it step by step, with the strange feeling that it is both recognisable and indefinable. Value belongs to the order of the absolute; it is not inscribed in the temporal, even if the latter seems to suggest it. It is not there, then, that we decipher it. 

The part played by experience is even smaller with regard to the future, which is the only domain of the moral act (not being of the order of that which is, but of that which must be, since it is impossible to decide to do something in the past, or even at the very moment where a decision is being made). 

Firstly, it is hardly worth recalling that it is not experience as such which entitles me to conclude that, if things have happened in a certain way up to now, they will happen tomorrow and for always in the same way. This induction is logically based upon our belief in the stability of nature. Such is the case too with the law of high numbers, which must postulate the nonintervention of new causes likely to disrupt the average rate of our calculations. Finally, with all my experimental knowledge and its appertaining postulates, what do I achieve? I learn of the practical possibility (or impossibility) of achieving an objective, or of the degree of probability of success. 

What will tell me if that which I plan is worthy of my research? And when faced with several possibilities, what is going to make me decide to select a particular one from among them, which might be the least favoured by human nature? It is all too obvious that the preference we give to a certain direction in our activity, to the exclusion of all others, arises not from reality, but from an ideal. So, if this ideal is only an emanation of our empirical inconstant self; if it is only an attribute of our effective or virtual feelings, it too becomes a transitory attribute, an instantaneous phenomenon. How can it claim the right to rule an act that is about to happen, when it might itself be no more when the act is about to begin? Thus one thing arises out of two: either our will can content itself with an ideal which coincides with the act, which is born and dies with it, like the will of impulsive or insane people, or, on the contrary, it will demand of it its rights, through which the ideal will be imposed upon it, for the future as well as the immediate present, which means that it will demand it to have some stability before allowing it the right to rule over it. Then we will no longer be in the realm of the empirical self and pure experience, since a stable ideal is the very definition of moral law. A law is never a product of experience, but an object of demonstration, or of faith. 

'Experience' which makes authority 'moral': is this not a contradiction in terms? Conclusion It has now been demonstrated with clear evidence that both doctrines only retain one aspect of moral truth. Their common mistake is more in their exclusivism and their reciprocal negation than in their positive position. 

So, that which happened to the theory of knowledge has now happened to . practical philosophy. Idealism or realism, rationalism or empiricism, and so many other philosophical schools of thought, are only in opposition because each has insisted on one necessary condition of human knowledge, holding it to be the sufficient condition and total cause, when it is only one element among many others. On one hand, neither logical concept, nor scientific law, nor the sum total of all known concepts and laws, can ever meet and define the concrete object completely, which is the point at which they come together, but which is infinitely beyond them. On the other hand, any real object will remain completely irrelevant and inaccessible to us if it is not subsumed into the forms and laws of our mind. In other words, if prime principles and general laws exempted us absolutely from confronting them with reality; if reality had nothing more, offered us no new aspect, the world would become undifferentiated, indiscernible; it would be without life, without history or dimensions. If, conversely, there were no acquired truth and established law, the mind would cease to be itself: it would lose its structural unity, disintegrate and would have no hold on human nature. In the same way, from a practical point of view, if a scientist always had to start everything again from the beginning, no progress would be possible, and the edifice of truth would never be built. It is when idea and object, form and matter, hypothesis and experience, come together, that the spark of true knowledge ignites. 

And so it is with morality. Neither the abstract formulation of a general rule, nor the painstaking analysis of a particular situation, made separately from one another, would ever be enough to guide our will. As we saw earlier, it is the synthesis of a universal ideal coming from above and an actual reality, which is only a means of clarification, that provide an excellent guide for our conscience. Like a hyphen between the ideal and the real, between the absolute and the relative, the human conscience must always bring these two terms together, by establishing such an agreement between them that the act which is born from their happy marriage is imbued with these two characteristics: it represents both the stability of eternal law and the novelty of artistic creation. 

Is this not the very conception of obligation such as it is defined in the precepts of the Qur' an? be mindful of Alliih, as much as you can. 64:16 Can we not immediately see the characteristic feature which distinguishes this formulation from the others? It does not say: do what seems good to you, according to the inspiration of the moment; it is not that of a rigid tyrannical duty which does not admit of exception or modification. It is neither the one nor the other; yet it responds to both of their deep tendencies. In these concise and lucid terms, the Qur'an invites us to turn our eyes towards heaven, whilst supporting us with the solid foundations of reality. In this way the two ends of the chain are linked: ascension towards the ideal, while safeguarding human nature; submission to the law and freedom of the self. 

But, you say, can this be possible? Won't these two opposing terms clash together again? From the moment that each individual is allowed to determine his duty in relation to his particular situation, is he not also allowed to relate it to his most capricious notions and undermine the authority of the commandment? Not at all. For the conscience which the Qur'an addresses is not the empty, brute conscience which has been left without any other guidance than its primitive instinct, as attributed by Rousseau to his natural man; nor is it the conscience of a fictional self, like Kant's transcendental self. It is a conscience which joins together two conditions that are absent from others. Firstly, it is enlightened by a positive teaching wherein duties are clearly defined and ranked. It is, furthermore, confronted with a living reality which is greatly venerated. In other words, it is the conscience of a believer. Now the characteristic of this conscience is that it contains within itself the personality of its legislator, who is always ready to be consulted. It cannot, therefore, surrender itself to considerations which it recognises to be illegitimate in the eyes of the author of the law, without betraying itself. 

Here is an example: God says to me: 'Do this unless you cannot; do not do this unless you are compelled by necessity'; and He also warns me against secret yearnings which might tempt me to transgress the commandment, on the pretext offalse necessity.In these circumstances, can I justify myselfby considering a little disturbance to be an obstacle, or some mild intimidation to be a force of necessity, when I know that it is not what God meant by these words? Of course, God does not always respond to me explicitly in doubtful cases; He may not even suggest the same positive or negative solution to all of us. 

There will always be opportunities for me to commit an error of interpretation or of definition. This eventuality is a natural consequence of my human condition and of the freedom granted to me by this very condition. In a doubtful case, what is essential for me, as a believer, is to strive to discern and follow faithfully what might be God's recommendation, considering the entirety of all His rules. If my solution is wrong, then I shall not be held guilty if I have made the necessary effort, which is my own, to enlighten myself. That in doubtful cases everyone is obliged to refer to his own conscience and abide by its response is what the Prophet, inspired by the Qur'an, told us in his famous words, some of which are as follows: 'The purely licit and the purely illicit have been made clear; but between the two are unclear cases. He who restrains himself when in doubt has saved his faith and honour.' 'Avoid that which throws you into doubt; choose that which does not trouble you; truth is peace; falsehood leads to suspicion.'When asked to give a definition of good and evil, the Prophet answered: 'Ask your heart, consult your conscience; good is what gives peace to the soul and the heart; evil is that which troubles the soul and makes the heart palpitate, whatever men may say and whatever they may offer you.' But, you object, apart from such doubtful cases, which are relatively rare, if the law has determined everything, the individual conscience will not have any part left to play in the institution of duty. We would say that is true if a rule were never able to direct all the individuals that it governs, to plan for each individual all the cases which it has to solve, and for every case to provide a concrete image of the unanimous verdict that agrees with the other rules. In other words, it would be true if there were only one way of understanding a rule, one single way of applying it and of bringing it in agreement with the others. It is not any of these points of view. 

Even if we suppose that the first point is resolved, we will easily see that the most precise rule that one can formulate inevitably comprises some undetermined aspect. Between the undetermined and the determined there lies a whole gamut of options, not only for the free choice of a psychological conscience, but also for the intelligent evaluation of the moral conscience, since the distinctive features of any singular act are neither all to be ignored nor all to be considered; most of the time they have both characteristics, either in succession according to the case, or simultaneously, according to the point of view at which one is placed. It therefore requires an individual effort and a special tact to appredate them for their proper value and to choose those which are the most essential. 

Far from constituting a privilege reserved only for specialists capable of being jurists, the recourse to individual effort, to ensure that one's duty is in conformity with the objective reality, is a universal duty, incumbent upon the most ignorant man, as well as the most competent. It becomes necessary as soon as a moral concept is transformed into a moral action. just as a magistrate must verify for every case that he examines whether it really is a case anticipated by the formula of a certain law or a certain system of laws, so each one of us is obliged to judge for ourselves whether the action we intend to carry out satisfies the requirements of the rule. For example, let us take the moral rule which commands us to provide for the needs of orphans. This rule does not indicate to us the weight, measure, kind, or quality of care deemed sufficient and suitable for every circumstance. In the same way, the ritual rule which commands the faithful to turn towards a particular direction to pray does not instruct us to mark out an arrow indicating the right direction every time we travel. The juridical rule that prescribes that a judge can only allow as witnesses people who are honest and just does not inform him of a person's righteousness and sincerity. This indetermination, this inevitable silence of a rule, this distance between concept and reality, is the most eloquent solicitation addressed to our conscience to continue the legislative work which the law has started. We must even pursue this work until all ambiguity is removed, in such a way that everyone can say: this is my duty with this specific action and not any other. It is therefore at the point where the task determined by the law ends, and with that the constraint of its authority, that the task of the individual in the exercise of his liberty begins. We can even go further. If we place ourselves at the actual point of view from which it was determined, we must acknowledge that a rule is never made in order to shackle our freedom, but somehow to increase it. Instead of allowing our thoughts to be scattered across all the possible meanings in the search for wise rulings, the advantage of having an established rule is firstly to spare us from stumbling and thus diminishing the chance of making an error. Moreover, the very fact that it provides a framework for our activity only increases it in power and effectiveness, not unlike a stream which is dug up and its banks strengthened. What our freedom might have lost in extension, it gains in depth, in the search for the best ways of performing a duty. 

But there is not just one duty. Besides the complexity and the perpetual changing of the conditions of life, there is the multiplicity and interaction of moral precepts. It is precisely in the confrontation between these two fields that the most extensive terrain opens up to our freedom. To prove this point, let us borrow one example from the rules of a game. 

We know that in the game of chess, for example, the progression of each piece is simple and follows a strictly defined rule. Can it be said, however, that the strictness of the rule paralyses the freedom of the player? On the contrary, it is well known that any chess player can produce an infinite number of moves, to such a degree that no two games are identical. The most interesting aspect of this comparison is that each player's originality consists much less in his way of applying the rule to move a piece, than in the way in which he commands the strikes, co-ordinates the moves and combines forces. This is where the genius of a player is revealed, in the intuition by which he discovers in a labyrinth the shortest, safest route to the exit. 

Something analogous happens in the moral order: among the tasks that I am called to fulfil, there are those which are prescribed for me to do daily, others which are periodic or circumstantial, others for which the occasion might arise only once in a lifetime. My body, my mind, my family, my homeland, each of my attachments requires an action determined by a rule. 

However, when I get up in the morning, I can organise a timetable of tasks in different ways and set out the itinerary in order to put them into action. 

During the given lapse of time, I can integrate a various number of good works, perform one to a higher degree of perfection than the others, accomplish one as early or as late as possible, content myself with ordinary forms of doing good or strive to create something new, of greater value. It is not just one single gesture which must be considered as a quite ingenious synthesis of numerous duties. In such a way, everyone may freely compose an original page of their moral life, whilst respecting the general rules of this human art. How could anyone demand more freedom, with the intention of breaking this framework, without aspiring to perversity or madness? This is what any legislative wisdom worthy of its name must spare us, by sketching out the outlines of our behaviour. What it must not do - or else it risks violating our natural right and reducing us to servile, mechanical obedience - is interfere in the detail of our oeuvres, which by nature we wish to construct, each one as he pleases. 

The part which we are to play in legislating on our obligations is from then on well defined. The rules of the law are not created by us; we have them already made, implicitly or explicitly, by our Legislator. We construct the definition of our concrete duties from these ideals to the extent of our capability. Such is the reasonable and conciliatory position of moral obligation which the Qur'an takes. It situates man in his right place and in conditions which suit him exactly, between nature and pure spirit. When Bergson thought that he had found two types of ethics, one of obligation, the other of creation, he was only artificially separating two indissoluble elements of the one and same reality. True morality is neither pure submission, nor absolute invention; it is both together. It is not the attitude of a slave or of an absolute master, but that of a citizen, participating in some way in the authority of the law, by the choice and initiative which are his rights. 

Who could add or subtract something from this, without finding excess or deficiency? Until now, we have only established a kind of compromise between the legislator and the acting person, in virtue of which each one of them supplies one part of the definition of concrete duty. The subject's participation in legislative power appears to be a kind of co-operation based upon the division of work; a kind of co-operation where two actions complete each other without any violation, and the two collaborators remain separate from each other, only meeting half-way. In reality, it is greater and better than that. On one hand, by adhering to the sacred law, our conscience assimilates it, upholds it, makes it its own, as if it participated in the creation of eternal truths. On the other hand, when we synthesise different established rules, adjusting them to our situation, we do not do so in the absence of a master, but under his patronage, his care and control. We are always inspired by him, as if he still continued within us his role as legislator, down to the minutest detail. From this one can say that here, between the agent and author of the law, there is not only collaboration, but union. One could say a fusion of two wills. 

Which is it, among the earthly philosophies, that has been able to achieve such an intimate reconciliation between demands that are so diametrically opposed? In our opinion, only a system of religious ethics is capable of that task, and it is precisely that which has been so eminently achieved in Qur'anic ethics. 