Any moral doctrine worthy of the name is essentially based on the idea of obligation. This is its most fundamental basis, the pivot, the nucleus around which the whole ethical system revolves, whose absence would destroy the very essence and substance of practical wisdom. For, without obligation, there is no responsibility and without responsibility, there can be no return of justice, whence chaos, disorder and anarchy, not just de facto, but de jure, according to the so-called moral principle itself. 

One can see in which way certain modern theoreticians would like to lead us.How can one possibly conceive of a moral rule without an obligation? Is this not a contradiction in terms? Or are we to make the conscience a mere tool of artistic appreciation? Is it not evident that ethics and aesthetics are two distinct entities? In a most profound sense, it is true, anything which is good is beautiful. Is the opposite equally true? Certainly, the idea of virtue has its own intrinsic beauty which the soul can taste even though it may not be pleasing to the eye. But it is something more; by its very nature, it acts and motivates, it makes us want to act in order to make it a concrete reality. On the other hand, reduced to its most simple expression, the notion of beauty has nothing to do with action, especially when its object does not depend on our will. Thus our admiration for divine omnipotence, or for the majesty of the celestial vault, does not induce us to create copies of them. Even when an artist conceives an idea for a great project that he can execute, this idea does not absolutely force him to carry it out, it gently invites him to execute it when he wants to and when he is at leisure to do so. Or even if it imposes itself upon some, it does not impose itself upon others with equal compulsion. In any case, far from going against feelings, it expresses them. Furthermore, although a fault within a work of art may well shock the senses, it will not offend the conscience. It is not something immoral. 

On the contrary, moral good is characterized by this imperative authority over everyone, by this necessity that compels everyone to carry out the same order, whatever might be the state of their actual feelings; a necessity which makes disobedience seem odious and abominable. We shall see later in which form the Qur'an presents this necessity, which it calls camr: imperative, kitaba: prescription and fana: duty. Now that we have stated the principle of obligation and nominally defined it, we must delve deeper into the knowledge of its nature, by examining its sources, its characteristics and its antimonies. 

The sources of moral obligation In his in-depth analysis of moral obligation, the French philosopher Henri Bergson was able to discover two sources: one, the force of social pressure; the other, the force of human, or rather, divine, attraction. 

He explains that to play the role that is assigned to us by society, to follow the route that it has traced for us and to which we abandon ourselves daily through a kind of habit upon which we scarcely reflect, which imitates the instinct of a bee or an ant, is what one ordinarily calls 'carrying out one's duty'. Were we to resist it for an instant and be tempted to modify the prescribed route, we would somehow be led back to it because of the overbearing pressure of collective life. It is altogether different in its second aspect. Although the morality of the crowd is the effect of a collective constraint, that of the privileged is an aspiration towards the ideal. It is a rapture of creative love, which tends not only to orient the conduct of the individual towards a higher direction, but also to bring society along with him and lead it, rather than be led by it. As a description and analysis of a given phenomenon of experience, one can say that the Bergsonian exposition has not omitted much that is essential; as a theory of moral obligation, however, this analysis presents certain difficulties and differs in some respects from the Qur'anic point of view. 

Already, with respect to the description, one could ask - since it concerns the designation of all the forces that act upon the will - why it is that a third factor is not indicated, one more ancient and more deeply rooted in human nature, namely the individual or living element? For what really matters to every fellow citizen is not just to conform to what society dictates and to behave like a cell within an organism, but also, and above all, to seek his own preservation, independently, even at the expense of the group to which he belongs. This we turn to below. 

What is of greater concern in this analysis is that the two terms moral and obligation seem to us to contradict each other, for, from the moment that an obligation becomes a semi-instinctive constraint, it loses its moral qualification; conversely, spontaneous love is the very opposite of obligation. Strictly speaking, true morality is not found here at all, neither in one case nor the other. Man is always presented to us as the toy of conflicting forces: sometimes pushed by instinct, sometimes carried away by emotion, never an independent personality capable of comparing, appreciating and choosing. Now, in order to establish morality, it is not enough for the ideal to present itself to us as the objective of an exalted aspiration, nor for the social imperative to appear as a tyrannical tax. Both must undergo a genuine process in the conscience from which they emerge newly fashioned, based on justice, corroborated and prescribed by reason. As long as the ideal is not invested with this imperative and reasonable disposition, and even when it does not act to pursue a mirage or a fleeting dream, it will remain determined by a certain idea of beauty. This feeling, however noble it may be, is not a moral principle. 

It is the same with any unjustified submission that proceeds from a kind of collective intimidation. This is why we see the Qur'an constantly protesting against these two enemies of morality: the pursuit of impetuous desire and blind conformity. Do not those who wish to continue a tradition without any understanding do so even though their fathers used to walk in ignorance and error?6 Thus, essential elements that have been omitted from Bergson's analysis have left an immense lacuna: a rational element, a properly moral element in the agent and another in the commandment: intelligence, freedom and legitimacy. He has greatly underestimated the representative role of the intellectual faculty, 'the last in line'; he has greatly insisted upon the little effectiveness it offers in the war against passion, but even so, the very essence of morality resides in the reflective activity of the soul. 

In spite of certain errors in the way that he presented his theory, Kant was more correct in claiming to have discovered the source of moral obligation in the highest faculty of the human soul, independent of both inclination and the outside world; he writes: Duty, a sublime and great word ... what origin is worthy of thee and where is the root of thy noble stem to be found ... ? It can be nothing less than that which elevates man above himself ... that which links him to an order of things that the understanding alone can conceive. Belonging both to the intelligible and the sensible worlds, man therefore has a dual nature wherein the nobler (reason) commands the lesser (unfounded selflove). The voice of reason is so clear, 'so insistent, so perceptible for even the grossest of men . . . the boundaries between morality and self-love are so clearly and exactly delimited that even the most ordinary perception cannot fail to know whether something belongs to the one or the other.'Thus reduced to its most simple expression, free of any formalist or transcenentalist subtlety and purified as well of a radical pessimism and certain coldness, the Kantian doctrine is not only incontestable, but we believe that it can also be regarded as similar to the Qur'anic doctrine. 

This book teaches us that the human soul has received the knowledge of good and evil in its primal structure.As well as the faculties of language and the external senses, man is endowed with moral awareness;he already knows the two paths of virtue and vice. It is true that the soul commands to evil, but man is also capable of mastering his inclinations; and for he who controls his faculties and restrains his desires, Paradise will be his home. Even if not everyone exercises such influence upon himself there are nevertheless those who do so with God's help. 'Whenever God wants good for someone', so the Prophet has told us, 'he raises within that person's inner heart a counsellor who exhorts him to act or to abstain.' There is therefore an internal force within man, which can not only advise him and clarify his choice, but which, properly speaking, can also command him to act or not to act. What is this inner authority that claims the right to give orders to our lower faculties, if it is not the enlightened part of our soul, which is reason. Furthermore, the Qur'an says so in its own words, when it articulates the following alternative concerning the unbelievers: Do they follow the command of their reason, or is it that they are an unjust people? 72:32 This verse states the third principle which has been excluded from ethics. 

There is no other justified rule of conduct other than the commandment of reason. It is therefore the sole legitimate authority. 

Within these conditions we can agree with Kant that we are both legislators and subjects. The moral experience of remorse only serves to confirm this duality. Whenever we neglect our duty, we feel we are lowering ourselves to a position which does not belong to us; we tacitly avow that we are a noble, albeit fallen, creature. The Qur'an continually re-awakens andre-instils within us the sense of our original dignity. Not only has God honoured men, extended their dominion over land and seas and favoured them greatly over many We have created;not only has He ordered the angels to prostrate themselves before the father of mankind/a title of honour of which the Qur'an frequently reminds us/but even if we choose to leave aside these external signs of human dignity, and consider them from the point of view of their moral value, it does not seem to us that the Qur'an considers human nature to be intrinsically bad or irremediably corrupt. On the contrary, man was created in the finest mould.It is only those who do not believe and do not practise good works that have a fretful, unstable and that fall lower than the lowest of creatures;it is only those who have a heart and do not think, eyes and do not see, ears and do not hear that make themselves brute beasts or worse still.It is thus a matter of free temporal choice, not transcendental. Everything resides in the good or bad use that one makes of one's superior faculties. Cultivating these faculties ennobles the soul; forsaking them darkens it. The Qur'an does not confine itself to the intellectual faculties alone: it takes greater care to awaken our noblest and most legitimate feelings, but it prompts them into action only under the control of reason. It is always to us that it addresses itself; that is to say, the luminous part of our soul, our faculty of understanding, which weighs the pros and the cons in everything and assesses different values. 

Among the higher feelings that the Qur' an brings to life within us we may give as an one which is found upholding all our social duties, taking the term 'society' in its broadest sense: the sense of human fraternity. In order to present us with a tangible form of the horror that should prevent us from slandering an absent person, the Qur'an compares the slanderer to someone who would like to eat his brother's dead flesh, adding no, you would hate it, every one of you. However, since it addresses our faculty of understanding, are we not to conclude that, in the absence of any positive teaching, man already possesses all the necessary means, both intellectual and affective, to discern what he is to do or to avoid? And so, is it not our concern to legislate on what is good and evil for ourselves? It is necessary to clarify the meaning and import of such an assertion. Are we to limit ourselves to the human point of view, and privilege individual conscience, or to place ourselves in the position of the thing in itself? As long as the notions of good and evil are rationally defined as 'quality or defect', 'in conformity with or contrary to nature', 'worthy of approval or blame', Muslim theologians do not have any difficulty in accepting man's legislative competence in this matter. But is that which we judge to be good or evil according to the light of our intelligence necessarily so in itself? In other words, is it equivalent to the light of divine reason? If so, are we already under obligation to God even before receiving His commandments through His messengers? It is this very point that the theologians continue to debate. The answers that they give us vary, ranging from the rationalists (Mutazilites and Shrites), who affirm that it is universally true, to the Asharites who deny it categorically, to the Maturidites, who accept it only for simple duties. 

But who cannot see that our rationalists have gone too far in their belief in the infallibility of human reason? For is there not at least one domain which is impenetrable to our intelligence? It is the way in which man must worship his Creator. If each and every one of us is left free to organise his own worship, either he will remain perplexed and do nothing, or he will resort to all kinds of imaginary and arbitrary ways. Even in other areas, we must recognise that this natural light, enveloped by inclination and confused by habits, must undergo a kind of refraction and follow a multitude of paths, according to times, places and temperaments. And so it is that beyond certain essential duties, acknowledged by every normal conscience, moral certainty must gradually give way to conjectures, uncertainties and aberrations. 

For instance, what is our duty towards our sensible nature? Are we to grant our desires nothing, to impose upon ourselves sufferings and mortifications, following this way, as in Buddhism, to Nirvana and nothingness? Or is it sufficient to profess, like the Stoics, an indifference towards all the good and the evil things of this world, whilst preferring some to others? Or are we to profit from all the enjoyments of life, whether with prudence and discernment, as the Utilitarians teach, or without rule or method, like Aristippus and the poets of every age? And yet these are all intelligent beings who profess to have investigated human nature and to have brought us all the most unique way of living in conformity with it. 

In our relations with our fellow human beings things are not much better, and we can expect a similar discrepancy of opinion. Thus - to mention only examples that are already controversial - is a person who has suffered a crime to seek revenge, or to forgive, or does he have the choice? Are we to treat our sisters with reserve and severity, or show them brotherly love? Should we help someone to be virtuous or leave him to his own ways? And if we want to consider the details of everyday life, such as selling, taking interest, wine, marriage, incest, and so on, the variation of opinions will be even greater. 

Reasons will always be opposed by reasons and feelings by feelings. 

Kant indeed saw the perils that strike the morality of the individual conscience. Beyond a certain point, it is impossible to establish, in effect, a law which can necessarily be applied to every conscience. Why should I sacrifice my opinion to yours? It is therefore indispensable to be able to resort to a higher authority which can decide the matter; and it is certainly not in society that one can find this authority, since this concerns morality, not legality. We can see the perfectly fair reason for which Kant wished to demand this legislation from a higher authority, reuniting the dual moral and universal characteristics. He thought he had found it in reason itself, in its purest and most abstract form, which rules everything through the law of noncontradiction. Unfortunately we shall have occasion to record the failure of such a criterion.Kant himself was aware of the powerlessness of his critique to determine what human duties are specifically, the division of which belongs to a scientific system and not to a critique of reason in general, which involves no reference to human nature.But what men need precisely is a rule that they can apply to their nature. In easy cases, anyone can find such a rule already written in some way in their conscience: no one needs a formal, abstract entity. But when the need for it arises, this empty idea tells us nothing precise. 

We are therefore forced to look elsewhere. Where are we to find such a splendid light to illumine our conscience when everywhere it finds nothing but darkness? Where are we to find this anchor of salvation to which we can attach our souls, which are tossed about by doubt? To these questions there is only one answer. Nobody knows more competently and wisely the essence of the soul, or the law of its development and perfection than the author of its being.It is from the infinite light that I must take my fragment of light. It is necessary to turn to the absolute, infallible moral conscience to guide one's own conscience. 

It may be that you hate something when it is good for you and it may be that you love something when it is bad for you. Allah knows and you do not know. 2:216 Instead of 'transcendental reason', one must say 'transcendent reason'; instead of a conceptual abstraction, one must have recourse to this concrete, living and omniscient reality, which is divine reason. Only revealed light can assist immanent light; only positive divine law can continue and complete natural moral law. In the Qur'an, reason and tradition go hand-in-hand. In the heart of the believer there is a double illumination, whereas the unbeliever has only one. Does this mean that we must distinguish two different sources of moral obligation? Not at all. Rather, we say two layers of the same source, the least pure of which is the nearest to the masses. For, on the one hand, this complementary light is not accessible to us, has no hold on us, nor any moral sense, except through our individual conscience and on condition that it is recognised. It is from this source that we receive the immediate command, whatever the circumstances. It is our human reason which tells us to deliver ourselves to divine reason. This is why al-Ghazali said that it would be meaningless to talk of an obligation coming to us from outside of ourselves, for it would be absurd for us to concern ourselves with something which is of no value to us, even if we were coerced. On the other hand, when, left to my natural light, I question myself before taking action in order to know what my duty is in a relatively clear case, the indication given by my conscience only has the worth of a moral value in my eyes inasmuch as I believe it to show me, not a truth that is relative to my feelings, but moral truth itself. All my efforts of deliberation have the aim of deciphering this truth, which I believe to be imprinted at the deepest level, indeed in the very essence, of any reasonable being. Now when we are told that we are our own legislators as members of the intelligible world, we must agree upon the autonomy that is attributed to reason. What does the phrase 'reason is its own legislator' mean? Does reason create the law or does it have it already complete, forming a part of its structure which it can impose upon the will? For if reason were the author of the law, it would be absolute master, able to maintain or abolish it as it pleased. If it is not able do that, it is because the law is pre-established, engraved by the craftsman who made its nature, like an innate idea which cannot be removed. 

Thus, consulting one's reason simply means to read the book of our pure and specifically human nature, such as it was created by God. In fact, when the most hardened of unbelievers refers to the authority of reason, in reality he is only listening to this divine voice which speaks within us all without saying its name, although it says it clearly when it speaks to the believer. However, if both lights, natural and revealed, spring from the one single source, it must be concluded that, in the last analysis, it is always God who indicates our duty to us, although in two different forms: internal or manifested. 

This brings us to the subject of moral obligation in Islam, in its form as positive law. As we move to this new terrain, we must ask ourselves whether there is one, or several sources of Islamic legislation. It is generally assigned four: the Qur'an, or 'the Word of God'; the sunna, or 'Tradition of the Prophet'; ijmac, or 'unanimous decision of the community'; and finally, qiyas, or 'reasoning by analogy'.

Now, if the analysis that we have made is correct- except for some details which will be added to its formulation shortly - there must only be one legislative authority in the proper sense of the word. In many passages, the Qur'an confirms this idea. It categorically states: jurisdiction over it belongs to Allah alone. 6:57; 12:40 jurisdiction belongs to Him alone. 6:63 He is the judge and there is no reversing His judgement.The Qur'an presents the Prophet to us not only as absolutely submitted to the divine law, but as the very first one to submit to it: Say: my prayer and my rites, my living and my dying are for Allah alone, the Lord of all the worlds, who has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the first of the Muslims. 6:163 What, then, is this fourfold principle? 1) The Qur'an Since, for Muslims, the Qur'an is the very Word of God, it is entirely qualified, without any question, for expressing the divine will. Should it not then be regarded as the sole source of Islamic legislation? To allow another source of direct and real obligation besides the Qur'an: is it not to associate with God other types of wisdom claiming the same inviolable right to command? Do we see of what the authority that is conferred upon other principles actually consists? 2) Thesunna It is true that everyone agrees that in the practical teachings of the sunna, or Tradition of the Prophet/a second and very important source of Islamic legislation can be found, in addition to the Qur'an, the Word of God. The Qur'an itself seems to encourage the faithful to submit to all the dispensations of the Prophet, even if these were taken on his own initiative. However, looking at things deeply, the prophetic dispensations only become a definitive obligation in any aspect - moral, legal or religious - on condition that the idea they bear reflects the character of an explicit or implicit revelation. As soon as the divine character is lacking, the lesson and example given by the man are no longer authoritative. This distinction is already indicated in the Qur'anic text: you who believe! Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when He calls you to what will bring you to life! 8:24 The Prophet himself is the one who established this distinction in the most clear and imperative way: 'If I command you to do something in my own name, I am but a mortal; but if I bring you something from God, keep it; for I could not lie on God's account.'Not only does he declare that his opinions concerning the technicalities of material life are fallible, as this side of things is clearly outside his mission, but in that which concerns the aim of his divine mission, namely, the moral, legal or ritual order, he can fall into slight errors when he is not supported by the Revelation. Thus we see the Qur' an reproaching him on several occasions for having allowed himself to feel too much sympathy towards the unbelievers, for having too merciful an attitude in their regard, where he should have been more uncompromising.So, in a case of theft which was referred to him, he erred, being deceived in his judgement, after which the Qur' an put him right. If there had not been the assistance of the Revelation, he would have condemned the innocent while absolving the guilty party.Similarly, let us remember the splendid exhortation that the Prophet addressed one day to a certain number of litigants before settling their case: 'I am only a human being. You bring your disagreement before me; but it might be that one of you presents his case better than the other, and that I give a judgement after his plea. If it ever happens that I give the advantage to one of you by granting him something that belongs to his adversary, let him not take it, for my decision would only give him a piece ofhell.'39 It sometimes happened that, when leading the ritual prayer, he would unduly omit or add some detail. When questioned: 'Has anything happened to the ritual?', he would answer: 'If anything had happened I would have told you; but I am only a man; I forget, just like any of you; when I forget something, please remind me.' Where he declares himself to be absolutely infallible is, as we have seen, when he gives an order as being a message from God. Once this message has been transmitted to its destination, sufficiently explained, and conserved in the memory of the community, then natural error, which never fails to attract man's attention, however lofty and enlightened his mind, can very well happen to him too, with the difference that he never persists in error. If he does not return by ordinary means, the Revelation will intervene to correct him and put him back on the right road, otherwise, the whole community would be induced into error and follow him down an erroneous path. 

However: Allah would never misguide a people after guiding them until He had made it clear to them what they should avoid. 9:115 This means that, in the absence of such a rectification, any of his orders and judgements that are not contested by the Revelation are regarded as implicitly approved and therefore they are rightly received as divine commandments. In the same way, whichever way he behaved is, in principle, also a good example by which Muslims measure their conduct, provided that he himself did not say anything to the contrary. Thus, since all authentic adrths which are not abrogated and are part of the Prophet's mission, are actually only another expression of the divine will, they have for Muslims the same moral authority as a text from the Qur'an. If the adfth contains more detail and precision than the Qur'anic text, it is this that 'judges' the latter; it explains it, determines its meaning and establishes its mode of application. 3) Jjmii c The above, then, explains the sense and the measure in which the prophetic tradition can be said to be a principle of obligation. What are we now to think of the sovereign authority assigned to the other source of legislation, known as ijmac, or the unanimous decision of the community? The authority of ijmac can be traced back to some Qur'anic passages, such as: You are the best nation ever to be produced before mankind. You enjoin the right, forbid the wrong and have belief in Allah. 3:110 Whether this passage is addressed to the Muslim community in general or, as is more probable, to the first generation who had witnessed the Revelation, is of lesser importance: there will always be somewhere a group of people whose unanimous opinion is sanctioned by the holy Book as being infallible in moral matters, incapable of allowing something evil or of forbidding something good. A similar argument in favour of this prerogative of ijmac can be drawn from another passage, which, having accorded those among the Muslims who possess the commandment of affairs the same right of obedience as that which it accords the orders of God and His Prophet, immediately adds this caution: that in case of controversy, it is necessary to consult the two main authorities.This seems to imply that as long as there is common agreement, there is no need to look for any other criteria in order to judge whether any measure dictated by leaders is just. If we consult the documents which contain this tradition, we can see that this proouncement is not just restricted to the time of the Companions, as one might have expected from the Qur'anic texts, but extends indefinitely to all generations of Muslims. To quote one text which is acknowledged as authentic and which is very explicit in this regard: 'For always, and until God's will intervenes (to change the order of things), there will remain a group from my community who will never cease solemnly to uphold truth, and will not be harmed by the opposition of its adversaries.'Since the party of truth therefore remains to endure, the idea, in Islam, of a unanimous agreement in error is thus excluded as being practically impossible in the Muslim world. 

People have come to regard ijmiic, whatever the era, as the highest, irrevocable authority which can judge even the texts of the Qur'an and the adfth, and cannot itself be judged by them, nor destroyed by any other previous or later opinion. Muslims in general have submitted to it without reservation, except for some Kharijites, Muctazilites and Shi"ites. 

How, then, are we to reconcile this attitude with the absolute submission and the deepest veneration that a Muslim must reserve for God, for His Holy Book and for His Messenger inasmuch as he is God's interpreter and His spokesman? How, especially, can it be compatible with the logic of Islam, which strongly condemns any blind conformity and constantly refers to reason and common sense, even in its most fundamental dogmas? One can understand just to what degree this doctrine outraged a rationalist such as alNazzam, who declared: 'True ijmac is the opinion whose legitimacy can be demonstrated, even if it is the opinion of one person.'Common agreement is worth nothing if it is unfounded. 

To look at this more closely, we can see that al-Nazzam is neither completely right nor completely wrong. He is right, because he defends a principle highly prized in the Qur'an, but he is wrong in believing himself to have discovered a preliminary condition which everybody else had neglected before him. 

Some clarification is therefore necessary in order to define this ijmac, to which any Muslim can appeal as a sure legislative authority, founded upon justice. The term ijmac is normally translated as 'consensus' or 'consensus omnium'. This literal translation is not quite adequate. The agreement is not to be thought of as a unanimous vote coming from a plebiscite imposed upon a whole nation or on all Islamic nations, wherein the most utterly godless and uncultivated minds would vote alongside the most learned. Nor should we represent the voting body as a religious council or a public assembly whose members, elected or nominated, meet under the same roof in order to discuss certain dogmatic, economic or political questions. Neither in its object nor in its form does ijma c resemble any of these Western organisations. 

Firstly, from the point of view of its object, the role of ijmac is to legislate on any new problem of a moral, legal or ritual order,technical questions about everyday life, as well as those of theoretical religion being equally excluded from its competence; material life also, because no text guarantees against an error that might occur in a communal decision in that domain. Dogmatic questions are excluded for a very different reason. In effect, if the fallibility of the entire community on a religious subject of a practical order can be considered as a possibility that must be excluded, this must equally be so, and even more so, in that which regards an object of faith. Not everyone even agrees to making reference to ijmac in this domain. If some tolerate it with secondary issues, nobody accepts it when it concerns fundamental, dogmatic issues. A Muslim does not have the right to have recourse to the authority of others to establish his faith; there would be a vicious circle if religion were to be built upon a base which is only established by the religion itself. 

As for the conditions in which the vote must be put into effect to constitute an irrevocable legislative authority, the established rule is very exacting with regard to the basis, but remains absolutely indifferent to the exterior form that the organisation of the voting body can adopt. Whether members are nominated by the state or not, elected by the people or not, whether they may meet in one plenary session or are scattered all over the world, none of it affects the legitimacy of the result, provided that it is obtained according to the regulations. The essential point is that each member, conscious of his intellectual independence and moral responsibility, freely expresses his opinion after careful deliberation of the problem at hand. However, the point that is worth noting is that no one can be considered as a member of this college unless he already possesses the quality of a specialist and is competent in the subject; that is to say, if he meets the required conditions which entitle him to refer directly to the source documents and draw informed conclusions from them. In other words, not only must all the members have at hand the necessary documents to solve any problem that arises, but they must also be experienced in critiquing the texts when they have not already been established by accredited authorities. They must also know the language in depth, in its literal as well as its figurative style, and be able to understand the main ideas as well as those that are secondary, whether they are explicit or implicit. In addition, they must be well-versed in the history of the Islamic legislation under consideration, know the specific circumstances (asbab alnuziil) which have determined it and the stages of its evolution (al-niisikh wa'lmansiikh), if there are any. Finally, it is necessary for them to have penetrated the spirit of the law and the aims it intends to fulfil, through the applications made by the Prophet and his Companions. 

It can be seen that far from being an aggregate of arbitrary, spontaneous (I would say unconsidered) opinions arising mechanically from imitation, or animated by a spirit of partiality, ijmac appears to have unity, an identity of unshakeable convictions which truth imposes upon all enlightened souls. We know just how much subjective conditions cause our personal views to differ, to the extent that they diverge too much. However, when it happens that in such conditions the intellectual effort of each person is deployed according to his own way of thinking and free from any foreign interference, reaching the same solution as everyone else, this can only be so because the solution appeared to each conscience with such clarity that it precluded any discussion. 

The infallibility of ijmac, under consideration here, cannot actually be attributed to either the thinkers themselves or to any particular text - since its authenticity may be refuted, or its interpretation considered in different ways - but to the reference to the well-established and deeply studied collection of Qur'anic and prophetic documents on which our thinkers have been able to base their judgement. 

4) Qiyiis Whereas the ?:ahirites, a purely exegetical School, preferred to keep to the three sources mentioned above: kitii.b, sunna and ijmii.c, the other Schools, authorising themselves on the example of the Companions of the Prophet and the opinion of the majority of their successors, accept a fourth and last source, namely qiyiis, or reasoning by analogy. Are we to believe that their doctrine tends to accord with that type of autonomous, rational legislation denied to communal decision and to the Prophet himself? Not at all. 

Firstly, by its very definition, this reasoning supposes the existence of a model case, to which one compares the new case; but the type-case must already be mentioned elsewhere: in the Qur'an, the adfth or ijmii.c. Moreover, the shared characteristic in both cases must either or the why of the legislation, the reason for which the solution of the original case was adopted. However, if this common characteristic was explicitly mentioned in the text, or is unanimously acknowledged as the reason for the original solution, there is no difficulty, even for the ?ahirite School, to make it the index, to see the necessary and sufficient condition of the earlier judgement. 

There is therefore no difficulty in generalising this statute and applying it whenever the established motivation can be found. However, in the case where this motivation, or causal link, can only be adduced through a subtle effort of reasoning, are we to understand it, with the conclusions that result, as being implied within the spirit of the revealed legislation? We suggest that the answer to this question must have various degrees. The reticence of the ?ahirite School at least constitutes a protection against the abuse of intellectual freedom of some jurists. 

The Malikite School, on the contrary, has gone further in the liberal sense. 

Referring to the example of the first Muslims, Imam Malik authorises this inductive reasoning, not only starting from a well-defined text, bringing the same solution to a particular problem which is analogous to the problem under scrutiny, but also starting from general processes to which the law has had recourse in innumerable matters more or less related to the question at hand, which together emerge as one certain idea: that such a type of good is an essential aim which the law seeks to realise by all means possible. The new case only presents us with another means, before being used when it appears in its turn, in order to realise the generic good, which Malik called al-mlaa al-mursala, or 'indeterminate good'. It is in virtue of this principle that this scholar was able to resolve a certain number of moral and legal problems in a rather original way, even though it clashed somewhat with the letter of the law. However far you search through the various currents of legal thought in Islam, one truth remains indubitable: It is that the ultimate goal for which all legislators aim in their various ways is to reach this unique source from which everyone far and wide must draw: the divine decision. This decision the Qur' an records first; the adlth then comment upon it and define it. If both texts are silent, qiyiis attempts to discover it in its deepest spirit and meaning; lastly ijmac intends to take it from all the evidence together. God alone is therefore the legislator; the others are but direct or indirect transmitters of His decree. 

As yet we still have not touched upon the deepest root of moral obligation in the Qur'an. Up to now, we have been able to bring natural moral law back to a kind of divine law, already implied within the very structure of human reason. 

We have then shown how this partial light is not sufficient to supply us with a law which is concrete, complete and universal, and shown the necessity, in order to obtain this threefold character, of having recourse to an authority which, transcending human beings, can enlighten them enough through a positive teaching which is sufficiently precise. This authority, which must be endowed with absolute consciousness and infinite light, can only be that of the Perfect Being. We have finally reduced all sources of this positive law to one unique source, and all commandments to one commandment, whether explicitly or implicitly expressed: that of God. 

However, the Qur'an does not present this divine commandment as absolute power, sufficient in itself to establish the realm of duty for us. On the contrary, it is edifying to see with what care the Book often tries to attach its justification to each resolution of the law, and to each precept the moral value which constitutes the established benefit. When for instance, it invites us to accept any conciliatory move from our neighbour, even if it is not to our advantage, it supports this recommendation with this aphorism: reconciliation is better 4:128 In the same way, when it prescribes for us the duty to fill the measure and to weigh with fair scales, it adds: that is better and gives the best result 17:35 To justify the rule of modesty which asks men to lower their gaze and master their senses, it gives this explanation: that is purer for them 24:30 Having commanded us to examine a case well before judging it, it continues: in case you wrong others unwittingly 49:6 When it commands that debts should be recorded in writing, as well as the date of their repayment, it comments: doing that is more just in Allah's sight, more reliable as testimony, and the best way of avoiding doubt between you 2:282 Rather than us adding to the examples of particular commandments, it is enough to see how the Qur'an encourages us to strive for spiritual values and quality in general, rather than quantity: The bad and the good are not the same, even though the abundance of the bad may tempt you. 5:100 the garment of virtue is the best 7:26 he who has been given wisdom has been given great good 2:269 It even allows us to witness the fundamental principle which inspires all of the divine legislation, formulated thus: Allah does not command indecency. 7:28 Allah commands justice and doing good. 16:90 So, what we assumed to be the last link in the chain of references does not prove to be so. Divine reason does not hold the form of its verdict as the primary principle of moral obligation any more than human reason. It too claims reference to another criterion. It directs us back to the very essence of duty, to the quality of the action, to its intrinsic value. It is in its accord with this objective truth that the commandment justifies itself in our eyes; it is through this that it solicits our adherence, and it is upon this that it establishes its moral command. 

Only, we do not see for ourselves the profound character which constitutes the essence of the just and the good per se, whenever and wherever it appears. 

As with any essence, we do not see it directly and in its totality; we only catch a glimpse of it, thanks to this fragment of light, so limited in extent and intensity, which we contain in our nature. There is only one pure and unlimited light that can encompass it adequately and with complete certainty. 

And it is precisely for this reason that believers have the right to take divine reason as the most perfect moral guide which can direct them to it. It is therefore in the notion of value that the true source of obligation resides. It is the reason of reason, and the ultimate reference of morality. 
