
In our relations with our fellow human beings things are not much better, and we can expect a similar discrepancy of opinion. Thus - to mention only examples that are already controversial - is a person who has suffered a crime to seek revenge, or to forgive, or does he have the choice? Are we to treat our sisters with reserve and severity, or show them brotherly love? Should we help someone to be virtuous or leave him to his own ways? And if we want to consider the details of everyday life, such as selling, taking interest, wine, marriage, incest, and so on, the variation of opinions will be even greater. 

Reasons will always be opposed by reasons and feelings by feelings. 

Kant indeed saw the perils that strike the morality of the individual conscience. Beyond a certain point, it is impossible to establish, in effect, a law which can necessarily be applied to every conscience. Why should I sacrifice my opinion to yours? It is therefore indispensable to be able to resort to a higher authority which can decide the matter; and it is certainly not in society that one can find this authority, since this concerns morality, not legality. We can see the perfectly fair reason for which Kant wished to demand this legislation from a higher authority, reuniting the dual moral and universal characteristics. He thought he had found it in reason itself, in its purest and most abstract form, which rules everything through the law of noncontradiction. Unfortunately we shall have occasion to record the failure of such a criterion.Kant himself was aware of the powerlessness of his critique to determine what human duties are specifically, the division of which belongs to a scientific system and not to a critique of reason in general, which involves no reference to human nature.But what men need precisely is a rule that they can apply to their nature. In easy cases, anyone can find such a rule already written in some way in their conscience: no one needs a formal, abstract entity. But when the need for it arises, this empty idea tells us nothing precise. 

We are therefore forced to look elsewhere. Where are we to find such a splendid light to illumine our conscience when everywhere it finds nothing but darkness? Where are we to find this anchor of salvation to which we can attach our souls, which are tossed about by doubt? To these questions there is only one answer. Nobody knows more competently and wisely the essence of the soul, or the law of its development and perfection than the author of its being.It is from the infinite light that I must take my fragment of light. It is necessary to turn to the absolute, infallible moral conscience to guide one's own conscience. 

It may be that you hate something when it is good for you and it may be that you love something when it is bad for you. Allah knows and you do not know. 2:216 Instead of 'transcendental reason', one must say 'transcendent reason'; instead of a conceptual abstraction, one must have recourse to this concrete, living and omniscient reality, which is divine reason. Only revealed light can assist immanent light; only positive divine law can continue and complete natural moral law. In the Qur'an, reason and tradition go hand-in-hand. In the heart of the believer there is a double illumination, whereas the unbeliever has only one. Does this mean that we must distinguish two different sources of moral obligation? Not at all. Rather, we say two layers of the same source, the least pure of which is the nearest to the masses. For, on the one hand, this complementary light is not accessible to us, has no hold on us, nor any moral sense, except through our individual conscience and on condition that it is recognised. It is from this source that we receive the immediate command, whatever the circumstances. It is our human reason which tells us to deliver ourselves to divine reason. This is why al-Ghazali said that it would be meaningless to talk of an obligation coming to us from outside of ourselves, for it would be absurd for us to concern ourselves with something which is of no value to us, even if we were coerced. On the other hand, when, left to my natural light, I question myself before taking action in order to know what my duty is in a relatively clear case, the indication given by my conscience only has the worth of a moral value in my eyes inasmuch as I believe it to show me, not a truth that is relative to my feelings, but moral truth itself. All my efforts of deliberation have the aim of deciphering this truth, which I believe to be imprinted at the deepest level, indeed in the very essence, of any reasonable being. Now when we are told that we are our own legislators as members of the intelligible world, we must agree upon the autonomy that is attributed to reason. What does the phrase 'reason is its own legislator' mean? Does reason create the law or does it have it already complete, forming a part of its structure which it can impose upon the will? For if reason were the author of the law, it would be absolute master, able to maintain or abolish it as it pleased. If it is not able do that, it is because the law is pre-established, engraved by the craftsman who made its nature, like an innate idea which cannot be removed. 

Thus, consulting one's reason simply means to read the book of our pure and specifically human nature, such as it was created by God. In fact, when the most hardened of unbelievers refers to the authority of reason, in reality he is only listening to this divine voice which speaks within us all without saying its name, although it says it clearly when it speaks to the believer. However, if both lights, natural and revealed, spring from the one single source, it must be concluded that, in the last analysis, it is always God who indicates our duty to us, although in two different forms: internal or manifested. 

This brings us to the subject of moral obligation in Islam, in its form as positive law. As we move to this new terrain, we must ask ourselves whether there is one, or several sources of Islamic legislation. It is generally assigned four: the Qur'an, or 'the Word of God'; the sunna, or 'Tradition of the Prophet'; ijmac, or 'unanimous decision of the community'; and finally, qiyas, or 'reasoning by analogy'.

Now, if the analysis that we have made is correct- except for some details which will be added to its formulation shortly - there must only be one legislative authority in the proper sense of the word. In many passages, the Qur'an confirms this idea. It categorically states: jurisdiction over it belongs to Allah alone. 6:57; 12:40 jurisdiction belongs to Him alone. 6:63 He is the judge and there is no reversing His judgement.The Qur'an presents the Prophet to us not only as absolutely submitted to the divine law, but as the very first one to submit to it: Say: my prayer and my rites, my living and my dying are for Allah alone, the Lord of all the worlds, who has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I am the first of the Muslims. 6:163 What, then, is this fourfold principle? 1) The Qur'an Since, for Muslims, the Qur'an is the very Word of God, it is entirely qualified, without any question, for expressing the divine will. Should it not then be regarded as the sole source of Islamic legislation? To allow another source of direct and real obligation besides the Qur'an: is it not to associate with God other types of wisdom claiming the same inviolable right to command? Do we see of what the authority that is conferred upon other principles actually consists? 2) Thesunna It is true that everyone agrees that in the practical teachings of the sunna, or Tradition of the Prophet/a second and very important source of Islamic legislation can be found, in addition to the Qur'an, the Word of God. The Qur'an itself seems to encourage the faithful to submit to all the dispensations of the Prophet, even if these were taken on his own initiative. However, looking at things deeply, the prophetic dispensations only become a definitive obligation in any aspect - moral, legal or religious - on condition that the idea they bear reflects the character of an explicit or implicit revelation. As soon as the divine character is lacking, the lesson and example given by the man are no longer authoritative. This distinction is already indicated in the Qur'anic text: you who believe! Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when He calls you to what will bring you to life! 8:24 The Prophet himself is the one who established this distinction in the most clear and imperative way: 'If I command you to do something in my own name, I am but a mortal; but if I bring you something from God, keep it; for I could not lie on God's account.'Not only does he declare that his opinions concerning the technicalities of material life are fallible, as this side of things is clearly outside his mission, but in that which concerns the aim of his divine mission, namely, the moral, legal or ritual order, he can fall into slight errors when he is not supported by the Revelation. Thus we see the Qur' an reproaching him on several occasions for having allowed himself to feel too much sympathy towards the unbelievers, for having too merciful an attitude in their regard, where he should have been more uncompromising.So, in a case of theft which was referred to him, he erred, being deceived in his judgement, after which the Qur' an put him right. If there had not been the assistance of the Revelation, he would have condemned the innocent while absolving the guilty party.Similarly, let us remember the splendid exhortation that the Prophet addressed one day to a certain number of litigants before settling their case: 'I am only a human being. You bring your disagreement before me; but it might be that one of you presents his case better than the other, and that I give a judgement after his plea. If it ever happens that I give the advantage to one of you by granting him something that belongs to his adversary, let him not take it, for my decision would only give him a piece ofhell.'39 It sometimes happened that, when leading the ritual prayer, he would unduly omit or add some detail. When questioned: 'Has anything happened to the ritual?', he would answer: 'If anything had happened I would have told you; but I am only a man; I forget, just like any of you; when I forget something, please remind me.' Where he declares himself to be absolutely infallible is, as we have seen, when he gives an order as being a message from God. Once this message has been transmitted to its destination, sufficiently explained, and conserved in the memory of the community, then natural error, which never fails to attract man's attention, however lofty and enlightened his mind, can very well happen to him too, with the difference that he never persists in error. If he does not return by ordinary means, the Revelation will intervene to correct him and put him back on the right road, otherwise, the whole community would be induced into error and follow him down an erroneous path. 

However: Allah would never misguide a people after guiding them until He had made it clear to them what they should avoid. 9:115 This means that, in the absence of such a rectification, any of his orders and judgements that are not contested by the Revelation are regarded as implicitly approved and therefore they are rightly received as divine commandments. In the same way, whichever way he behaved is, in principle, also a good example by which Muslims measure their conduct, provided that he himself did not say anything to the contrary. Thus, since all authentic adrths which are not abrogated and are part of the Prophet's mission, are actually only another expression of the divine will, they have for Muslims the same moral authority as a text from the Qur'an. If the adfth contains more detail and precision than the Qur'anic text, it is this that 'judges' the latter; it explains it, determines its meaning and establishes its mode of application. 3) Jjmii c The above, then, explains the sense and the measure in which the prophetic tradition can be said to be a principle of obligation. What are we now to think of the sovereign authority assigned to the other source of legislation, known as ijmac, or the unanimous decision of the community? The authority of ijmac can be traced back to some Qur'anic passages, such as: You are the best nation ever to be produced before mankind. You enjoin the right, forbid the wrong and have belief in Allah. 3:110 Whether this passage is addressed to the Muslim community in general or, as is more probable, to the first generation who had witnessed the Revelation, is of lesser importance: there will always be somewhere a group of people whose unanimous opinion is sanctioned by the holy Book as being infallible in moral matters, incapable of allowing something evil or of forbidding something good. A similar argument in favour of this prerogative of ijmac can be drawn from another passage, which, having accorded those among the Muslims who possess the commandment of affairs the same right of obedience as that which it accords the orders of God and His Prophet, immediately adds this caution: that in case of controversy, it is necessary to consult the two main authorities.This seems to imply that as long as there is common agreement, there is no need to look for any other criteria in order to judge whether any measure dictated by leaders is just. If we consult the documents which contain this tradition, we can see that this proouncement is not just restricted to the time of the Companions, as one might have expected from the Qur'anic texts, but extends indefinitely to all generations of Muslims. To quote one text which is acknowledged as authentic and which is very explicit in this regard: 'For always, and until God's will intervenes (to change the order of things), there will remain a group from my community who will never cease solemnly to uphold truth, and will not be harmed by the opposition of its adversaries.'Since the party of truth therefore remains to endure, the idea, in Islam, of a unanimous agreement in error is thus excluded as being practically impossible in the Muslim world. 

People have come to regard ijmiic, whatever the era, as the highest, irrevocable authority which can judge even the texts of the Qur'an and the adfth, and cannot itself be judged by them, nor destroyed by any other previous or later opinion. Muslims in general have submitted to it without reservation, except for some Kharijites, Muctazilites and Shi"ites. 

How, then, are we to reconcile this attitude with the absolute submission and the deepest veneration that a Muslim must reserve for God, for His Holy Book and for His Messenger inasmuch as he is God's interpreter and His spokesman? How, especially, can it be compatible with the logic of Islam, which strongly condemns any blind conformity and constantly refers to reason and common sense, even in its most fundamental dogmas? One can understand just to what degree this doctrine outraged a rationalist such as alNazzam, who declared: 'True ijmac is the opinion whose legitimacy can be demonstrated, even if it is the opinion of one person.'Common agreement is worth nothing if it is unfounded. 

To look at this more closely, we can see that al-Nazzam is neither completely right nor completely wrong. He is right, because he defends a principle highly prized in the Qur'an, but he is wrong in believing himself to have discovered a preliminary condition which everybody else had neglected before him. 

Some clarification is therefore necessary in order to define this ijmac, to which any Muslim can appeal as a sure legislative authority, founded upon justice. The term ijmac is normally translated as 'consensus' or 'consensus omnium'. This literal translation is not quite adequate. The agreement is not to be thought of as a unanimous vote coming from a plebiscite imposed upon a whole nation or on all Islamic nations, wherein the most utterly godless and uncultivated minds would vote alongside the most learned. Nor should we represent the voting body as a religious council or a public assembly whose members, elected or nominated, meet under the same roof in order to discuss certain dogmatic, economic or political questions. Neither in its object nor in its form does ijma c resemble any of these Western organisations. 

Firstly, from the point of view of its object, the role of ijmac is to legislate on any new problem of a moral, legal or ritual order,technical questions about everyday life, as well as those of theoretical religion being equally excluded from its competence; material life also, because no text guarantees against an error that might occur in a communal decision in that domain. Dogmatic questions are excluded for a very different reason. In effect, if the fallibility of the entire community on a religious subject of a practical order can be considered as a possibility that must be excluded, this must equally be so, and even more so, in that which regards an object of faith. Not everyone even agrees to making reference to ijmac in this domain. If some tolerate it with secondary issues, nobody accepts it when it concerns fundamental, dogmatic issues. A Muslim does not have the right to have recourse to the authority of others to establish his faith; there would be a vicious circle if religion were to be built upon a base which is only established by the religion itself. 

As for the conditions in which the vote must be put into effect to constitute an irrevocable legislative authority, the established rule is very exacting with regard to the basis, but remains absolutely indifferent to the exterior form that the organisation of the voting body can adopt. Whether members are nominated by the state or not, elected by the people or not, whether they may meet in one plenary session or are scattered all over the world, none of it affects the legitimacy of the result, provided that it is obtained according to the regulations. The essential point is that each member, conscious of his intellectual independence and moral responsibility, freely expresses his opinion after careful deliberation of the problem at hand. However, the point that is worth noting is that no one can be considered as a member of this college unless he already possesses the quality of a specialist and is competent in the subject; that is to say, if he meets the required conditions which entitle him to refer directly to the source documents and draw informed conclusions from them. In other words, not only must all the members have at hand the necessary documents to solve any problem that arises, but they must also be experienced in critiquing the texts when they have not already been established by accredited authorities. They must also know the language in depth, in its literal as well as its figurative style, and be able to understand the main ideas as well as those that are secondary, whether they are explicit or implicit. In addition, they must be well-versed in the history of the Islamic legislation under consideration, know the specific circumstances (asbab alnuziil) which have determined it and the stages of its evolution (al-niisikh wa'lmansiikh), if there are any. Finally, it is necessary for them to have penetrated the spirit of the law and the aims it intends to fulfil, through the applications made by the Prophet and his Companions. 