The characteristics of moral obligation Any law (whether it be physical, social, logical or anything else) necessarily and invariably rules all individuals who are subject to it, and the self-same individual in various circumstances, otherwise, that law would not be a law, which is to say a general and constant rule. Despite being of a very particular nature, the law of duty is nevertheless invested with this common characteristic: it is both universal and necessary. The universal charcteristic of moral law appears in the Qur'an with undeniable clarity. Not only do all of its commandments address to the whole of that which can be understood in a partial sense, but also the same rule, whether it is one of justice or of virtue in general, must always be applied to oneself as it is to others,to one's kin as it is to strangers, to the rich as it is to the poor,52 outside of the community as it is inside;whether it concerns a friend or an enemy.Even in cases where the text of the law does not contain a general term; even if it is given to suit a particular event, in principle it is held to be universal, which is to say that it can be extended to all analogous cases. That is what the Prophet stipulated.As long as the analogy is so clear that it is virtually identical, which is to say that so long as the two cases are differentiated only by negligibly individual characteristics (such as people, times and places), it is unanimously accepted that a judgement passed in the case of one person may be extended to all. The fiercest critics of qiyiis, Ibn .f:Iazm for example, uphold this principle and strongly defend it as a necessary consequence of the universality of the Prophet's mission and of the equality of all before the law. As we have seen, it is only when the characteristic shared by both is not concretely obvious and emerges only through an incisive rational process that the principle of reasoning through analogy becomes a source of controversy among different Muslim jurists. 

This is, however, only a detail which does not undermine the general principle. 

The universal nature of duty not only means that it extends to all individuals; it also implies that it can be applied to the various circumstances in which one individual may find themselves. This kind of universality is wrongly called absolute necessity. We shall see later how this term cannot strictly be applied to the Qur'anic notion of duty. Duty as it is established by the Qur'an is only imposed on mankind to the extent that it is possible; but it is necessary in this sense that it must not yield to our subjective states or our personal interests. The Qur'an tells us that it is the sceptics or those in whose hearts is a disease who obey the law only inasmuch as they profit by it; while those who have faith submit to it unconditionally.The Qur'an not only extols generosity which is shown both in times of comfort and of adversity,and courage which braves hunger, thirst and tiredness, but it also severely condemns those who allow such inconveniences to prevent them from carrying out their duty. When the divine law speaks, as it tells us in its own terms, it is not for any man or woman of the believers to have any choice about it. Can any stronger expression be found to establish the necessity with which duty is imposed? We must not, however, confuse this expression with either of the other two meanings of the word necessity: moral necessity is different from both physical necessity and logical necessity. Physical law exercises over our bodies a constraint to which we submit, involuntarily and inevitably; moral law, on the other hand, supposes freedom of choice; it is an obligation, but does not constrain us physically. From the beginning it leaves us the choice (at the risk of a later reaction) of whether to observe it or violate it. It is the primordial rule that the Qur'an ceaselessly proclaims, as much for the duty of faith as for practical virtue. Thus, faced with duty, one has the choice de facto, but one does not have it de jure. Moral necessity is therefore not existential, but ideal. It must not be confused at all with logical necessity. That which is logically necessary impresses itself upon the mind as a given. We cannot fail to see what the evidence shows us. That which is morally obligatory imposes itself upon the will as something which does not yet exist, but which must be. It is the result of a judgement of value, not a judgement of reality. The realm of duty is thus presented with its own original characteristic. It constrains neither the senses, nor the intellect, but imposes itself solely upon the conscience. 

Kant, however, believed that he could trace immorality back to the absurd or the irrational. No unjust rule, he said, can be established as a universal law without leading to a contradiction, either within its very concept, or in the will which endeavours to elevate it to a universallevel. In considering some examples by which the German philosopher wished to illustrate his argument, Bergson stated that he could only adhere to it on condition that any of such concept be understood, not in its simple, material definition, but with the inclusion of its obligatory nature and all of its ethical conditions. Thus, he explains, it would be contradictory for someone to whom one had entrusted a deposit, with the express or tacit arrangement for it to be returned, to then keep it, since the deposit would no longer be a deposit. However, is it not evident that, even though it is so limited, Kant's thesis still remains unproven? We even say that it is impossible to prove, no matter what dialectical skills are used, because, from the fact that an engagement taken yesterday has been reneged upon today, there certainly results a contrast between two opposite positions, but hardly a contradiction in the real sense of the word. 'The engagement was to have been kept' is a de jure proposition. 'It was not' is a de facto proposition. What internal impossibility is there to uphold these two assertions? As long as the two terms of the opposition do not proceed from the same source and are not related to the same references; as long as the affirmation and negation do not fall simultaneously upon the same matter and in the same conditions, there cannot be any logical contradiction, unless a new terminology is invented. 

'Reason demands', yes, indeed it does, always. 'The senses agree or refuse', alas! but it is the law ... such is the eternal struggle between ideal and reality, between moral law and the law of nature. The best proof of their noncontradiction is that they function simultaneously; the contradictory being what is most obviously expelled from the realm of reality. Instead of using the term contradiction, whoever maintains calling things by their name will only say: 'It was an annoyance' or 'It was a disappointment'. An annoyance for the ideal which should permeate reality and which is prevented from doing so; a disappointment for moral consciences with their worthy expectations. 

We do not want to play with words. One may call this action by which a deposit becomes no longer a deposit whatever one chooses. The point which demonstrates that the moral fault does not reside in this simple alteration is that one ethical factor is enough to change its quality in order for it to be blameless (for example, a concession made by the owner to the trustee). 

Instead of the issue of turning back on the moral obligation to keep one's word after it has been accepted, let us now consider the promise of such a person who allows themselves, in an hour of need, to make a false promise. 

What exactly will happen when we convert this statement into a universal law? Without doubt, elevated to this level, the action by which a man permits someone to cheat others will compromise the one by which he does not want to be cheated himself. The opposition now seems to have been transported to the legal realm, but does this antagonism imply a real contradiction: wanting and not wanting to be cheated? We believe that this apparent opposition is only due to a certain equivocation in the term 'to want', which here plays a dual role, both active and affective. In effect, our will - in the proper sense of the word: the faculty to decide - may very well enjoy taking the risk of laying down a general order which can extend to affect that which we mistakenly call 'will' and which is nothing else than our sensitivity, or faculty to desire. It is in this way that a judge wants, and finds universally just, the punishment of the culprit, even if he would not like being punished himself, if he were similarly guilty. Or to take up again the example of the false promise, does not the very fact of allowing others to cheat imply that the astute liar believes he can frustrate their deceit and escape their trap, without having to change his view? But, they tell us, by removing the trust from the word that has been given, does not the principle of a false promise destroy the very idea of a promise, which assumes that it will be believed? It is easy to expose the contrivance by which several notions are forced into one. Despite that, it does not contradict the idea of a promise, either in its essence or in its existence, or in the possibility of it influencing people - since some will always believe anything - but only in the certainty of its outcome. This is far from a logical necessity. 

What is logically necessary presents itself to us as an analytical and static truth; it is the agreement of the idea with itself, whereas moral necessity is rather of a synthetic and dynamic order: it qualifies a relationship between two different realms; it is the progression of the idea towards its coming into being. This is certainly not to say that its essence is in itself sufficient for it actually to exist, as with Descartes' idea of the perfect being, since a moral concept cannot be applied in reality except by the activity of a free and voluntary agent. It is necessarily conceived by such an agent as a value worthy of being realised, inciting his will to bring it into being. In a word, it is the demand of a practical ideal claiming its right to exist. With this notion of practical value, we leave the realm of the general characteristics that all laws have in common, to pass on to the characteristics which are specific to moral law. 

Thanks to a remarkably penetrating mind, Kant well understood the great difference which radically separates the moral rule from all other practical rules. This difference resides in the Aristotelian idea of end and means: that which must be sought for itself, or for something else. This is an idea rich in possibilities which Kant has fortunately known how to utilise and which we also retain, while disengaging it from Kantian formalism. In effect, although the art of living, with its rules of skill and prudence, only seriously requires us to act from the motive of a desirable aim, moral law alone demands action for its own sake, in virtue of the intrinsic value it possesses. Only the command of duty can truly be called obligation; the other imperatives are just simple advice indicating the means to anyone who wishes to attain the end. 

We provisionally leave aside the question of whether man is ever able to view his duty in such an impartial light. We do not now place ourselves at the point of view of the agent and we will discuss the doctrine which makes this ideal purity of intention a strict duty. Like Kant, we only maintain that, since any consideration of the consequence is alien to the idea of duty, moral law as such hardly needs an extrinsic value to justify its command. In order to establish its authority, it is necessary and sufficient that action be presented as obligatory or good in itself, without taking any account of its result, be it pleasant or unpleasant. To replace one of these considerations with the other would be to reverse the order of things, and not to proceed as a moral philosopher. Nevertheless, it is true that an action can be at the same time just, useful and pleasant. It is not forbidden to the legislator to add to the justifications of his order, but then he no longer simply plays the role of a moralist: he adds others to his office, which are not always compatible. An expert educator may even have to resort to this procedure to ensure that his teaching is effective. This addition is all the more justified when it concerns the education of beginners, but in proportion to the progress that is accomplished, morality becomes more and more pure, until it can finally support itself. It seems that it is by this progressive method that the Qur'an has proceeded in its teaching of ethics. Parallel to this characteristic of moral obligation, as seen from a legislative point of view, we have to mention another characteristic, from the point of view of application: it is that a moral action never consists of a physical deed which is unconscious, involuntary or unintentional. Whereas legality is satisfied with the act itself, and with the dry letter, morality always requires its spirit.

Even without taking part in the famous debate among Muslim scholars concerning the absolute necessity to perform one's duty solely out of duty, it is undeniable that in Islam the sanctity of duty demands at least that one contemplate one's action before taking it. It is absolutely necessary that, at that moment, the mind adopts such an attitude that the act is not considered simply in its physical aspect, but expressly in regard to its obligatory characteristic. If not, an action which completely conforms to the letter of the law remains like an empty gesture, a profane object, without any moral value. So, the law of duty is characterised by the fact that it is a law of freedom and reason, of intrinsic value and is essentially spiritual in its activity. 

We shall now return to its general characteristics, which it shares with all other laws, in order to present them in their precise Qur'anic form. We have seen how, from the Qur'anic point of view, this law is necessary and universal; however, this does not make it absolutely unconditional. What are its conditions? There are three: one concerns human nature in general; another, the concrete reality of life; the third, the hierarchy of actions. 

A The possibility of action It might seem superfluous to emphasise the idea of the physical possibility of an action as a sine qua non condition of moral obligation. Not only does the conscience of the common man acknowledge as an innate truth that nobody is bound to perform what is impossible, but it is even stated in numerous Qur'anic passages, such as: Allah does not burden any soul with more than He has given it. 65:7 We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear. 6:152; 23:62 Allah does not burden ... (the same phrase) 2:286 The circumstances in which this last text was revealed can help us to determine the sense of this impossibility, which is considered to be incompatible with obligation. In an earlier verse, it is stated: Whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts, Allah will call you to account. 2:284 Holding to the letter of this general statement, the Companions of the Prophet believed that it applied to everything which occurred within the conscience: ideas, decisions, desires, dreams, fantasies, and so on. They immediately came pleading to the Prophet, deploring their inability to obey, saying: 'We are not masters of our involuntary thoughts or of our inner voice.' He replied to them: 'Do you mean that, like your predecessors, the people of the Book, you say: "We have heard but we disobey"? Say rather: "We have heard and we obey".' Then there a revelation explaining the text mentioned above: 'Obligation is only imposed on people according to their ability.' Thus they understood that the various states of the soul which do not submit to the will were not and could never be the direct object of an obligation, no more than are the reflexes, instincts, appetites and natural inclinations. This is why all imperatives relating to love and hate, fear or hope, have been interpreted in a rational manner by the commentators, in a way that links them to a previous action, the cause of these states, or a contiguous or later action, but never to anything involuntary. This is how the love for God, an emotional and involuntary state in itself, may be acquired through a voluntary act: the contemplation of the infinite goodness of the divine and the remembrance of the blessings that it bestows on us, for people are made in such a way that the services rendered to them determine their love for their benefactors. It is in this indirect sense that love of God is the object of a commandment in the adlth: 'Love God for the goodness that He never ceases to shower on you.'67 Loving our neighbour can also be determined through comparable methods or through even more appropriate practices, which we find in a beautiful example recommended by the Prophet: 'Forgive one another (or shake hands) and your resentments will disappear; exchange presents, so as to foster mutual friendship.' By contrast, the command, 'Do not become irritated or angry'seems to aim at the effects of this emotion, rather than its causes. What is meant is: do not allow yourself to be drawn into the unforeseen consequences of anger; resist urges pulling you the wrong way and redirect them elsewhere. In the face of irrefutable evidence one does not only give one's acquiescence to belief itself, which is not regarded as a derivative obligation, since it is given. This is why, in order to summarise all the pieces of advice concerning faith, the Qur'an gathers them all into one: engage in meditative reflection in solitude, or in the company of one other person, in other words, far from the influence of the crowd. Islamic history, however, has witnessed a prolonged debate between Ashcarites and Muctazilites concerning this question: can God not only place upon people an unbearable burden (taklzf mii Iii yutiiq), but even oblige them do the impossible (takllf al-muMI)? The strange thing is that, whereas the Muctazilites, who in principle give free rein to reason, defend the letter of the text here, the Ashcarites, who often carry the standard of Muslim orthodoxy (without always being, it must be acknowledged, its best representatives), take the opposite position and teach the possibility, even the legitimacy, for God to place upon us that which is beyond our strength, to oblige us to carry out that which cannot be done, even the absurd. The reason for this reversal of position will become easier to ascertain if we place the controversial point within each doctrinal framework. 

In Muctazilite thought, this position is linked to a rational system which seeks to reach, through reason alone, the very essence of the Supreme Being and the moral laws which inform His actions, as well as those which He imposes on us. What is more, once they know the divine laws, they deduce a whole succession of defined rules, from which God can never deviate. God is good, wise and just. So, they state, whatever is in itself incompatible with these attributes, or which we conceive as such in all certainty, must not, cannot, be done by God; whence the following rules, among others: God must not create anything without considering its useful ends for his creatures (ricayat al-ala); and out of two possible good actions, He must perform the better one (riciiyat al-la); God must not intervene in our voluntary actions, either to determine them or to prevent them; conversely, he must arm us with equal power over two opposites and allow us to choose freely between them; one who obeys must be rewarded by God; one who disobeys without repenting must be punished by God and not forgiven, otherwise, He would commit an injustice. Is it a question of the nature of our duties towards God, towards ourselves, or others? These necessarily proceed from the nature of good and evil; and we have virtually an innate knowledge of this nature. Even if God had not manifested His will in the Scriptures, if He had not revealed His commandments to His Messengers, we would have known them all the same, and would have been bound to follow them. The Scriptures and Messengers only confirm and explain what we know through reason. 

It was in order to counteract these great aspirations, this excessive confidence in human reason, that the Ashcarites undertook to combat the arguments of the Muctazilites, one by one. of course, this polemical spirit could sometimes lead them to commit the opposite abuses. Wishing to counter argument with argument, the Ashcarites at first failed to proceed on solid philosophical grounds, or in any case those that were less dangerous, from what might be called a negative position, which consisted of objecting to the arbitration of reason in these matters, given the incommensurability of the finite human mind with infinite things. But, on positive grounds, they failed to find any wiser a solution, a constructive and truly Qur'anic solution reconciling opposing attributes without neglecting or exaggerating any particular one. Thus it is that the Qur'an teaches us that Allah ordains whatever He wills.How is it possible to understand this statement in an absolutely arbitrary sense when He confirms elsewhere that: Allah will judge with justice. 40:20 Here are the same opposing attributes in a different form. In one text it is said: As for my punishment, I strike with it anyone I will 7:156 but in the same text we find: My mercy extends to all things 7:156 and in another text: Why should Allah punish you if you are thankful and have trust in Him? Allah is Responsive, Aware. 4:147 In the same way, when the Qur'an declares that God could cause the destruction of the human race, the just as well as the guilty/or that nothing can oppose the crushing burdens He places upon us, nor the harsh measures that He takes against us/is it not clear that the conditional form is rarely transformed into the present? One may even state that it will never happen, since: He has made mercy incumbent on Himself. 6:13 Instead of underlining divine omnipotence, which the Muctazilites had avoided emphasising; instead of making it comparative to divine wisdom, which the Muctazilites had highlighted, our ardent, but not very prudent, theoreticians virtually suppressed the latter in favour of the former, but while conserving it in name only. 

When we come across a well-arranged piece of work, perfectly organised, each part having its function within the whole; or when we see an action lead to good consequences, we have the habit of explaining these things by means of other things; of taking a connection in space or in time, a structural interdependence, or a historical sequence, for an intentional finality. 

Anthropomorphism! the Ashcarites say; this human interpretation does not apply to the providential order where, according to them, there is no finality at all. God does what He wills and is indifferent to any outcome. God does not will one thing in order to achieve another; He wills both by one and the same sovereign act. So be itl we say, but in spite of this aimless, unbalanced voluntarism, should they not acknowledge that the realm of the will and existence is more limited than that of possibility and omnipotence? Then, nothing prevents all that God creates or commands from being in conformity with the requirements of justice and goodness, even though He is not bound by them. 

In this particular case, we will be satisfied provided we are reassured that, if not de jure, then at least de facto, and following a constant and invariable law, God only obliges people according to their strength. 

The most reasonable of the Ashcarites understood this, but others went further, led by their love of polemics.They tried to find an ingenious means of establishing the obligation to do the impossible per se not only as a right of the divine power, but as an already accomplished fact. And with exemplary temerity, they claimed to find concrete examples of it in the Qur'an itself. This is their precious discovery: It is the case of certain unbelievers to whom the Qur'an had announced that they would die in a state of unbelief, despite all the efforts made to convert them.However, these people were nonetheless required to believe all revealed truths, including that of their everlasting unbelief, thus to do the impossible: (1)- because nothing which God knows to be impossible can ever exist; (2) - it would even be contradictory to believe this particular revelation, after which they would never believe, since that would be to believe and not to believe. Adding some comments to this twofold argument, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi presented it as the most irrefutable proof from which rationalism could never escape. However, supposing that its premises are true, we can only see various specious paralogisms in this twofold argument. The first argument, which is derived from divine foreknowledge, is based on a confusion between two clearly distinct metaphysical notions: the possible and the real, essence and existence. It is not because a thing does not exist or never will exist that it is impossible in itself. Science does not change the essence of things, any more than their reality. It copies it, reproduces it and expresses it. If all that God knows as inexistent is impossible, we must also, for the same reason, say that everything He knows as existent is necessary: what is then left in the universe for the exercise of the divine will? As for the second argument, it arises from a logical confusion between two types of propositions, one independent and the other subordinate. To believe and not to believe are indeed contradictory, supposing that all requisite identities have been established, but to believe in never believing is an actual fact for the one who does not believe; since he feels it within himself, he knows it through the most immediate and intimate experience. 

As all their attempts failed in the Qur'anic domain, our polemicists directed their search towards a wider, purely rational area; and they now wanted to demonstrate to us that the obligation to do the impossible, far from being an isolated case in divine legislation, is a general rule from a certain point of view. 

In order to defend human freedom, their adversaries, the Muctazilites, placed that freedom prior to the action, in that moment when everyone experiences their dual power to act or to refrain. The Ashcarites objected that before acting, power is only virtual, whereas real power is contemporaneous to the action;now this power only ever affects these two contrasts alternately. While occupied with one, the other remains impossible, as long as the first is in the process of being enacted. He who disobeys an order and applies his activities elsewhere is therefore incapable of obeying it while his is disobeying it; however, at the very same time, he is obliged to carry out his duty. On this account, cases that are said to be exceptional, where the aim of the obligation is unrealisable, are at least as numerous as regular cases. 

But who cannot see that this is pure sophistry. Nobody has ever dreamed of interpreting an order given to someone who is disobeying it as an obligation to be obeyed at the same time as they are disobeying it. It is very clear that it is simply a matter of inviting them to stop their opposition and to replace their activity with one that is moral. If some insist on calling such an action impossible, that is only a false problem. Although they do not fall into agreement on the definition of the word, the two opposite camps find themselves in agreement on the facts themselves - and the principle that we defend remains intact. 

B Gentle practice Everything which cannot be subject, either directly or indirectly, to our power has now been eliminated from the realm of obligation. This elimination cannot only be a part of Islamic ethics; it must constitute the characteristic that is common to all just and reasonable ethics, more particularly to all revealed ethics, since the contrary is evidently incompatible with divine justice and wisdom. The purport of the texts cited above only confirms this point. In effect, the texts present this condition in such a categorical and universal way that we are entitled to interpret them as the statement of a law which God made for Himself, and which is applicable to all human beings at all times. 

Here now are other texts which not only exclude anything from Islamic law which is absolutely impossible, but also any burden which would normally be unbearable, and any difficulty which would exhaust human strength, let alone be beyond it. The Qur'an declares: Allah desires ease for you; He does not desire difficulty for you. 2:185 He has selected you and not placed any constraint upon your religion. 22:76 Allah desires to make things lighter for you. Man was created weak. 4:28 We have only sent you as a mercy to all the worlds. 21:106 We hear in these words a very new tone. Whereas the first condition, possibility, had been presented as an eternal truth, independent of space and time, we only find here moderate statements introducing this second characteristic, gentleness, as a historical fact attached to the community to whom the message is addressed, the followers of Islam. If this is not to say that it is a specifically Islamic characteristic, at least the systematic absence of a general statement on this subject suggests the idea that it is not common to all revealed laws. Now this idea, which can only be deduced here by the inference of the contrast in style, appears clearly expressed elsewhere: Our Lord, do not place on us a load like the one You placed on those before us. 2:286 Therefore, there was a heavy burden imposed in a previous revelation. In which religion? What was this burden? Commentators give several examples regarding the second point, but this is not the place to verify their historical value. Regarding the first point, the expressions that some of them have used allow us to understand that it concerns all the previous religions, from which Islam is detached by a kind of mysterious privilege. If we abide by the instructions of the Qur'an, we believe we may be able to give a more reliable and definite answer to these two questions. 

In the middle of a dialogue which the Qur'an reports as having occurred between God and Moses following the sudden death that struck seventy Israelites on Mount Sinai, we notice a sentence very similar to the one with which we are presently concerned, giving it all the more an explanatory value, as it uses the same word as ours: My mercy extends to all things but I will prescribe it for those ... who follow the Messenger, the unlettered Prophet ... who relieves them of their heavy loads and the chains which were around them. 7:156-7 The people of Israel and the jewish religion can therefore serve as an example in order to clarify the text in question, but to what extent? Are we to consider the two texts as co-extensive or, on the contrary, should we delve further back in history and, extending this example to former religions, conclude with the privilege of Islam on this point? Our position is clearly unfavourable towards this last hypothesis, for the following reasons. 

First, one cannot describe as burdensome a religion such as that of Abraham, to which Islam ceaselessly appeals and to which the Qur' an attributes the same characteristic of mercy.Second, according to the Qur'anic passages themselves, the difficulties inflicted on the people of Israel (such as the Sabbath and the prohibition of certain foods) were not part of the original religion. They were later commands, in order to punish them for their bad conduct: The Sabbath was only enjoined on those who differed about it. 16:124 Because of wrongdoing on the part of the jews, We made unlawful for them some good things which had previously been lawful for them. 4:160 The nature of the forbidden foods, to which this passage alludes, is explained in detail in another passage of Sura 6, ending with this conclusion: that is how We repaid them for their insolence. 6:147 Therefore Islam only re-established things in their normal order, which, according to the Qur'an, is the mission that jesus was commissioned partially to fulfil. Finally, in the third place, it cannot easily be understood how divine goodness should, from the very beginning, wish to establish an institution that would weigh so heavily on man, this feeble creature, and that would be so difficult as to make him groan under the weight of its burden, as the Arabic word 'ir' signifies. At the most, according to some confessions, we might speak of a relative difficulty in performing certain duties, or of an extended margin of freedom of initiative or freedom of choice. Whatever it is, we will not expand too much on this subject, which demands a more detailed comparative study and we now return to our starting point in order to see, through several examples, certain aspects of this practical gentleness which accompanies Qur'anic imperatives. 

One of the first aspects consists of the fact that, far from prescribing excessive zeal in pious behaviour, such as spending the night in prayer, the Qur'an discourages it and indicates that it has several disadvantages. We know that at the beginning of his mission, the Prophet was requested to spend a greater part of the night in praying and reciting the Qur' an;that, following his example, several of his Companions took up the custom of doing the same. 

Now, we read in the subsequent verses of the same sura about a lesson that was addressed to this group, bringing it to their attention that they would not be able to continue this practice in circumstances such as illness, travelling and fighting, and recommending them to remain awake only as and when the conditions of their lives allowed it.Later in Medina, the same excessive spirit of devotion appeared among some practitioners, and was equally condemned as an abuse, opposed to the spirit of the law. 

It appears from the corpus of Qur'anic and prophetic texts related to this subject that Islam attaches great importance to certain considerations of which the devout must not lose sight, and whose omission would be the natural consequence of this excess. As has come to be seen, not only must man guard against excessive practice to the detriment of other duties (trade, war ... ), but the pious act itself must not degenerate into an automatic formula, where one no longer has a clear awareness of what one is doing, or saying.The Prophet even observes that, forcing oneself to prolong the night prayer may interfere with the sensory system, causing regrettable slips of the tongue: instead of begging for God's forgiveness, one might utter blasphemies or call down curses upon oneself.Without waiting to reach this point, a simple bodily lethargy or mental satiety will be enough to allow oneself to rest from these devout activities.The application of a pious action should last only as long as it gives joy and cheerfulness to the heart, for we must not make divine worship hateful to ourselves. One last remark, and not the least judicious, is that someone who weighs up an action excessively is often led to find fault in that very action, or even never to perform it again. The Prophet compares such a person to a severe horse rider who continually tortures his mount, causing it die before he has reached his destination.All these examples are not so much concerned with removing an actual difficulty, as with preventing certain eventual difficulties that are likely to happen. The solution offered does not change anything in the structure of the action, but rather in its timing: it imposes a voluntary cessation at the right moment. 

We now consider the second aspect. We are dealing here with a duty which has been established in either normal circumstances, or in appropriate, specific ones; since these conditions change, they put us in a situation where performing our duty fully, as originally defined, becomes a real difficulty. Are we still to perform it notwithstanding? Is God so indifferent to our suffering as not to take into account the new situation? Certainly not, and this is where the merciful characteristic of Qur'anic law appears most clearly. In effect, the solution will consist of an adaptation of duty to the new conditions of life; the action will undergo a considerable modification: this will be, according to what circumstances require, a mutation, an attenuation, a postponement or even an abrogation. Whether the change in the situation is definitive and permanent, or relative to a particular case, or to a particular category of people or thing, the same considerations will apply to the action. 

Let us take the example where the duty has been attenuated in a definitive way. What is the numerical proportion in which Muslims who have been invaded must put up an armed resistance against their enemy? One to ten. This is the first solution that the Qur'an gave to the first Muslim army, when they numbered only a few hundred men. But, one curious thing is that the nation grew more numerous, and it never returned to its original state, since these young, eager people do not seem to have had the same energetic qualities as before. This is explained as a kind of natural relaxation, due to the great numbers of people who came to their aid and whose presence seemed to exempt each member from making a personal effort. In such unavoidable psychological conditions, how could such a community be obliged to attain the same heroism as the one at the beginning? Nevertheless, with a moral advantage through the faith that inspires him, the Muslim fighter will always have a lead over his opponent and cannot lower himself to be his equal. From this comes the second and final solution in which the ratio is now one to two. 

In this example, the law concerning such a difficult case was revealed at a later date. More often, it is given at the same time. Besides the normal case, where one is in a position to act, the rule foresees an exceptional case for which it gives an issue. Sometimes, it is a full dispensation. Thus, men who are sick are exempted from their military duty.People who find themselves oppressed in their country and who must search elsewhere for a secure place to exercise their freedom of faith and religion, will be allowed to remain if they cannot afford to go back.A traveller who cannot find wholesome, permitted food can, and even must within limit, nourish himself with anything available, rather than allow himself to starve to death. Sometimes it is a partial dispensation: On a journey, four-unit prayers are reduced by hal£.During battle, prayers may be performed walking or riding. Sometimes, it is a simple remission: Sick people and travellers do not have to fast at the prescribed time; they can make up for it later.Sometimes, the action which could not be performed is replaced by an easier one. A traveller who cannot find water for his ablution, or a sick person unable to use it, can perform the action symbolically, which consists of touching a clean stone or clean sand and then passing the hands over the face and arms. It may be observed that, in most of these examples, the text puts the emphasis on the practical gentleness that they imply and which characterises the mercy of the divine law. Thus they happen to have the necessary quality for demonstrating that it is not something accidental, or a matter of chance, but an essential principle, whose means of application is constantly sought. 

Let us look at another aspect of this relationship between duty and circumstance. In the aspects which we have studied up to now, the obstacle before which the obligation made some concession was a natural one, not a human creation. How about when, out of necessity, a mechanism has been set up that man himself has created and that he is capable of dismantling? Cases arise, nevertheless, where, in the long run, this device becomes like a rebellious and stubborn second nature. Is one to shrink away from this difficulty, treating it like a reality beyond man, for whose evolution one must passively wait? The original solution of the Qur'anic legislation is entirely different. It consists of approaching this situation and working it out with particular skill, with a view to allowing man gradually to go back up the slope which he descended, so that once he has reached a certain level, he will even accept the moral order, up to now set aside. 

A very striking example of this is found in the Qur'an's position with regard to a bad habit that is continually transmitted from generation to generation and deeply rooted in the nervous system and whole body of those who have acquired it; we are speaking of this stupefaction, this scourge of humanity, which is alcoholism. There are four passages in which one finds allusions to the state of drunkenness and fermented (alcoholic) drinks. Only the fourth and final one formally states the prohibition of these drinks. The first three are only progressive stages to prepare the psychological ground for the believers to accept this prohibition. 

The first stage of this path was put into effect by a word revealed at Mecca, a single word which hardly touches on the subject. Among the good gifts that God has provided in nature, the Qur'an cites: the fruit of the date-palm and of the grape-vine 16:67 and it immediately adds: You derive both intoxicants and wholesome provision. 16:67 Only in understanding this parallelism, where alcohol is compared to other produce which is qualified as good, without it being qualified as the same, do the believers already have sufficient motive to feel some scruple with regard to this drink. 

Then, soon after their arrival in Medina, they are struck anew by a second statement, which is meant to reinforce their scruples. It consists of a brief comparison between the advantages and disadvantages of alcohol and games of chance. From this comparison, the Qur'an concludes in these terms: But the harm in them is greater than the benefit. 2:219 If it is true that nothing in this world is absolutely good or bad, that which is called good or bad only contains a relatively high degree, then this conclusion had to be taken as a veritable condemnation. It is only because the prohibition was not clear enough in everyone's mind that a number of Muslims, perhaps the majority, continued to drink whilst the others started from the beginning of this era to abstain. It was necessary, therefore, for something more explicit to bring everyone to a clear conviction. However, it was not without an effect on those in the community who were unaware. As for the strong-minded, they waited to receive a definitive decision confirming their point of view. In fact, an injunction did come, but it was not definitive, forming only an intermediary stage. At this third stage, it was not said: 'Do not drink', but only: Do not approach the prayer when you are drunk. 4:43 One will realise the progress made by this step if one considers that the prayer in Islam constitutes not only the first religious duty to be performed regularly, but also the external criterion, the sign that designates the true believer, which must be performed five times a day, including four between midday and night. This means that a person who drinks during these intervals risks missing his most sacred duty. This partial and indirect interdiction was thus a practical way of spacing out the periods of alcoholic dependency, whilst at the same time reducing the sale of drinks, so as to clear them from the market progressively, without causing an economic crisis through a complete and sudden prohibition. 

From there to a definitive prohibition and clearing the market once and for all, there only remained one step, and it was taken by the fourth and last formulation: You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices, and [divining with] arrows are repugnant acts- Satan's doing: shun them so that you may prosper. 5:90 This gentle and progressive approach reminds us of the way clever doctors treat a chronic illness; or more generally of the way that mothers wean their infants. Without any violence or harshness, the digestive system is led by these means gradually to change its diet from light to more nourishing foods, passing through all the intermediary stages. How infinitely more gentle than medical skill or motherly tenderness does divine mercy appear! The progressive method we have just detailed is apparent not just in particular examples, it is also applied in an equally clear manner throughout the whole of Islamic ethics, as it is in the institution of Islam in general. We know that the Qur'an, which plays a principal role in this institution, was not sent down all at once and in the form that we see it today. On the contrary, it appeared gradually over about twenty years in the form of fragments of various lengths during two periods of roughly the same duration: the Meccan period and the Medinan period. It can easily be seen that the passages belonging to the first period are essentially concerned with establishing the faith and the principles and general rules of behaviour; that, with the exception of the rules regarding prayer and food, the application of these practical rules for solving particular moral or legal problems was almost completely reserved for the second period. From this point of view, one could say that the whole of the Meccan period was a kind of preparation. The particular applications of these general principles were so spread out, over a period of ten years or so, that each new prescription constituted a progression in the realm of obligation, relating to the previous stage and a point of departure for the next stage. Setting aside the particular accompanying circumstances, explaining and justifying the establishment of each new duty, and considering this series of commandments, each separated by long intervals, one can see that it is a pedagogical method of the highest value. It is enough to imagine what would have happened if this entire multitude of commands ruling every aspect of life had been delivered all at once and in a sudden manner; spread out in this way, each soul was perfectly accommodated, as if it gradually increased in strength and ability as it practised obeying each new command. 

The unbelievers living at the time of the Prophet failed to understand this refined legislative wisdom. This is why they protested Why was the Qur'an not sent down to him all at And the same verse which mentions this objection continues, providing us with the reply: It is so that We can fortify your heart by it. 25:32 In another passage, we read a second explanation: so you can recite it to mankind at intervals, and We have sent it down little by A'isha very well understood the meaning of this. cumar II, in tum, underlined its importance in the political field. One day his son c Abd al-Malik reproached him for being too patient: 'Why do you take so long in settling your business?' cumar replied: 'My son, do not be too zealous; God twice warned against wine, and He only forbade it the third time. If I were to impose the truth all at once, I fear people would only reject it all at once and this would generate discord. ' 98 C The delimitation and grading of duties Thus, moral obligation in the Qur'an is given with a twofold condition: the action to which it refers must be possible for ordinary human beings (subject to the will of man) and approachable in the concrete reality of life (practical, not tyrannical). 

This is not all. Even if it does not leave the realm of moral good, it is not enough for an action to be possible and practicable for it to be included under the category of duty. Here we meet a hierarchy of values, both positive and negative, cleverly arranged and richly detailed. In the first place, if we set apart elementary and definite duties whose application is not debatable (such as, not lying, returning what one has been entrusted to keep, helping anyone in immediate danger), there remains creative, constructive virtue, a field of activity which is so vast that it comprises endless degrees, all possible and practicable. Are we to perform them all, or is it enough to begin with something? In other terms, are goodness and duty two co-extensive notions? Do there not exist, beyond what is strictly obligatory, more and more meritorious degrees which we can ignore without falling into immorality? If we consult individual consciences, the diversity of responses certainly reveals opposing tendencies, as not all human beings have the same requirements and moral energies. Whereas strong place their duty at the highest possible degree of perfection and thus equate these two concepts, the masses tend to remain at a low degree and define duty according to a minimum of humanity and sociability. 

Despite what he says, we hesitate to class Kant among the philosophers who maintain the correlation between the idea of obligation and that of good, in the broadest sense of that word. This is because, in order to place the notion of duty above everything, he started by excluding all connections between man and a superior being and inferior beings from his area of investigation, thus limiting it to the individual and human society. Then, within these restricted parameters, he further distinguished two categories of duties which he calls perfect, or essential and imperfect, or accidental.° Finally, the duties which he includes in the latter category are precisely those whose aim is the perfection of the self and the happiness of others; the duties he calls strict are nothing but prohibitions: not to debase man, or to use him as a means to an end. The only perfection he deems absolutely obligatory, and at the same time impossible in this life, is that of moral intention, which consists in doing one's duty for duty's sake only. 

But to those who extend duty to all forms of good, and who also wish to make the highest degree of perfection possible a rigorous obligation in every domain, one may ask whether they consider all of these perfections a duty for everyone, or whether they leave everyone the choice of the domain which he wishes to perfect. It is clear that, according to the first hypothesis, something is demanded which is far beyond human ability, but, in the case of the second, does it satisfy the moral need of man if he is monopolised by one value to which he devotes himself entirely, to the detriment of the others? The human being is a synthesis of relationships: the personal, familial, social, human and divine; a system of elements that are interdependent and closely linked; all liable to evolution and progress, so that none can be neglected without damaging, deforming or mutilating the 'admirable proportion' in which man is created. The moral sense demands the progression of this ensemble altogether, which is only possible on condition that all parts are raised together to a certain level. The human soul must partake in all values, before it specialises in one of them more specifically. This is the Islamic view of duty. From this co-ordination of values, it necessarily results that in each branch of life, duty must occupy only a certain part of the good which is both possible and practicable for this very branch, and leave space for others to satisfy their own demands and obtain their legitimate share of our endeavours. This is a criterion whose upper limit can be ascertained by balanced minds, and of which each virtue ceases to be itself if it violates another virtue. 

However, this upper limit, which varies according to the intelligence and conditions of every being, only partially and negatively defines the field of moral good. Everyone recognises various degrees of merit in this vast field. 

Failing at one level or another leads to either severe condemnation, or light reproof; occasionally it arouses no reaction from the conscience at all. Does this not tacitly acknowledge that there must be two different values in the realm of good: a compulsory minimum and a more meritorious supplement? Consciences are not mistaken in that, but in wishing to consider the obligatory as the lowest possible level, a criterion in which people generally do not find their satisfaction. The upright man requires more. He vaguely conceives of an average of goodness, which cannot be measured precisely. How are we to define this average for every one of our duties? The human mind cannot provide a rational and objective criterion. Should we refer to the individual conscience? Then there would be no agreement on anything. Should we work together to establish a conventional limit? This would mean resorting to arbitrary opinion. Yet we need such definitions. for the law to be universal, it is necessary to have a certain homogeneous basis; otherwise, no rule would remain and the law would only be a meaningless word. Various attempts have been made rationally to define our strict duty towards our fellow human beings, but these have only been able to give the negative aspect, which is not to wrong others. Men thus are entitled to our justice, but not to our charity. Here, selfishness is established in law! And how are we to measure the minimum necessary of our duties towards God and ourselves? Islamic ethics offers precious insights on all these points. 

Aside from the absolute duty that carries no restriction or limitation, namely, the act of faith, it indicates two levels of good for each possible action and it names them quite distinctively and precisely: the 'quantum minima' below which one cannot go without neglecting one's duty, or above without exceeding the maximum; in other words, the obligatory good and the recommended good. Already that which it designates as strictly necessary represents a substantial participation in each merit. Besides that, in each domain the Qur'an opens the way to an ever greater participation and encourages everyone not to stop at this ordinary level, but always to rise to even higher degrees of merit. Above the established right it places the virtue of tolerance and insists above all on 'generosity'.If a debtor cannot pay back the debt, it is a duty to allow him more time; but it is more praiseworthy to allow him not to repay at all.It is a right to resist injustice but to endure and forgive: is one of the most magnanimous things 42:41-3 To perform one's duty well is good enough but: If anyone does good spontaneously, Allah is Responsive, All-Knowing. 2:157 Parallel to the degrees of positive value which one comes to discern in the Qur'anic concept of moral good, it is easy to recognise those negative values, which the Qur'an places opposite. However, with these two parallel columns the scale of values is still not exhausted, even at its basic level. The two opposites are brought closer together by a medium term, which links them without giving a solution of continuity. Between the value and the anti-value, the Qur'an places the non-value; between the prescribed and the proscribed, there is the non-proscribed. Similarly, in the acts which are prescribed it distinguishes firstly the primary duty, then other obligations, then finally more and more meritorious actions, and in those which are proscribed it ranks the unforgivable, then other bad actions, serious or venial, just as it establishes two degrees in the non-proscribed acts: the permissible and the tolerated. One is entitled to ask if anything can be added by the most sensitive and refined mind to such a hierarchy of values? It is in vain that we try to find some lacuna that might be likely to justify the appellation 'separatist mind', coined by L. Gauthier to describe the Islamic mind, which had established this hierarchy, acknowledged by the author as something purely Muslim: 'The juxtaposition of opposites is the formula in which everything is summarised in the Arab world, especially Muslim Arab world: religion, history, and so on.' That said, let us now resume our exposition at the point where we left off, to say a word on the true meaning of this gradation, which concerns Qur'anic allowances and permissions. Needless to say, permission in the proper sense of the word only refers to actions which are morally As for the allowances, one must first discard the idea of making a concession to something that relaxes mores, or to someone's passions and caprices. Before anything, this would be a negation of ethics itself, which by definition is a rule of conduct. What is it to obey a rule, if not to hold to it firmly and not to give in to temptations to turn away from it? That is given. If there is a kind of difficulty towards which the Qur'an shows itself to be inflexible and which it encourages us to conquer at any price, it is precisely that which implies resisting our inclinations. One has to choose between obedience to God and submission to our own unbridled desires: Do not follow your own desires, letting them misguide you from the way of Allah 38:25 Do not follow your own desires, and deviate from the truth. 4:135 Who could be further astray than someone who follows his whims and desires? 28:50 Thus, in the allowances made by the Qur'an, it is not a matter of inclining towards our whims. It is purely and simply a matter of taking into consideration the concrete reality to which we apply our activity, not that one goes down this path to the point of abandoning our effort and dispensing with our duty. We have seen that, in general, it is not in itself that the rule is subordinate to the situation, but in its spatio-temporal determinations: quantity, duration, form, date, and so on. If one does not wish for the moral law to become a dead letter, it must not be enclosed within a rigid framework of times, places and entirely external conditions; it must be applicable either in one form or another. It is only natural and just that the effectiveness of this application demands some adaptability to real conditions which are beyond our control. When, at the extreme limit, faced with the insurmountable obstacle of this reality, obligation gives way to necessity (such as in the case of an incapacitated man who cannot perform his military duty, or a deprived and starving person who can only find impure food), it is essentially a matter of preventing complete exhaustion from one single practice to the detriment of others of equal or more importance. The aim of the gentleness of this legislation is therefore not to diminish, but to rationalise effort. We shall see how the Qur'an has formed a synthesis of these two notions, but let us first clarify the Qur'anic position with regard to problems pertaining to the very concept of obligation. 

Antinomies of obligation With the notion of obligation, we are, in effect, at the crossroads of a multitude of practical antinomies, from among which all moral thought is extracted and with regard to which it must take a particular position. We draw attention to two principal antinomies below. 

1) Unity and diversity It is an indisputable fact that, if ethics is a science, it must be constructed not from specific and contingent propositions, but from laws which are both universal and necessary. None the less, if it is also a normative science, designed to govern human action, then it must consider life in its concrete reality. Life is essentially diversity, change and renewal. We are thus drawn to the following alternatives: either the model of behaviour which this science presents is considered to be immutable and universal, or it is open to variations and modifications. According to the first hypothesis, humanity is taken back to a single type that is perpetually identical to itself; space is then reduced to a point, time to an instant, the movement of the universe stops and life itself is removed and replaced by an abstract idea, which exists only in the imagination of the moralist. If, however, one takes into account the irreducible, inalienable characteristic of the singular action, which is subject to the alteration of time and the disparity of space, we can no longer talk of a rule, a law or a science. For what is a rule that is destined to die as soon as it is created; a law which only commands an individual for one instant; a science without any universality? So, to safeguard the unity of the law or to respect the diversity of the nature ruled by this law; to maintain the simplicity of the rule or to subordinate it to the complexity of the life to which it is applied; to rise to a pure and eternal ideal, or to descend to an ever-changing reality; to make the essence prevail, or existence? These are the extremes against which we must guard. We cannot approach one to any extent without distancing ourselves from the other. This is the first ethical difficulty. 

2) Authority and liberty However, there is another problem, which, moreover, is linked to the first. It is beyond question that the relationship expressed in the word obligation is one which puts two different wills together, and is even conveyed by their very natures, manifesting antagonistic tendencies: the legislator who commands, jealous of his authority, and the subject who acts, defending his freedom. The legislator's authority is all the more respected if the rules which it establishes keep their statements intact and so fixed that circumstantial variations do not interfere at all in order to limit or attenuate them. In such conditions, moral law becomes similar to natural law; the subject only submits to it passively and applies it blindly, so that the necessary response to pure obligation is worthless freedom and servile submission. Then what good is this conscience, if its presence or absence does not change anything in the course of things? If one satisfies the active subject, granting him complete freedom of action, the opposite effect will be produced: a command will be transformed into a simple piece of advice, which we can accept or ignore, according to our personal opinion. 

Faced with these contradictory demands are we to choose one, or to try to compromise? Which one to take? Which conciliation to make? This is the problem that must be resolved. We will now see how it has been solved in various ways. In the following lines and up to the end of the chapter, we propose to demonstrate how the Qur'anic solution can be considered as an impartial conciliation to all parties concerned, whereas ordinary doctrines have varying tendencies to opt only for one or the other of the two opposing terms. We will reserve the first of these two assertions for the latter paragraph, which will be assigned to the conclusion and proceed with the second, underlining the difficulties encountered by two current theories which are typical of two extreme views, one representing the intransigent authority of universal duty, the other defending the originality of psychological factors over the invariability of logic: the theories of Kant and Rauh. 

Kant It is known that, in order to resist certain doctrines which had softened ethics too much, accommodating them to the demands of worldly life, the German philosopher was not content to trace a line of demarcation between morality and feelings. He went further - too far. According to him, the concept of duty is not only isolated from any experience of the senses or concrete reality to which it may be applied, but it is also purged of its own characteristic, of the constitutive content of any particular rule, in order to conserve only its formal characteristic, that of being a universal law, valid for everyone. It is from this that he takes his definition of duty: any action whose rule can be made universal without becoming absurd. From such an abstract formula, Kant thought he could deduce a 'deontology' of ethics, to use Bentham's words; that is, a science of concrete duties, which specifies for each duty whether it is moral or immoral, just by considering whether or not it can be made universal. Is such an undertaking achievable? Is the very foundation of this construction solid enough to support it? Here, from the point of view with which we are concerned, is Kantian thought. It may be said that, overall, it constitutes three stages in its elaboration: a) the establishment of the initial act; b) an analysis allowing an ascent to the most general principle; c) descending again to set out the fundamental rules for human ethics. 

a) The starting point of the Kantian doctrine consists of the concrete act that is supplied by the immediate conscience, which is to say that, in our moral judgements, we evaluate actions not in virtue of their results, be they pleasant or unpleasant, but in relation to the idea of a general rule, applicable to all subjects and independent of any consequences. This fact is undeniable. 

Far from establishing the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of suffering as a principle of moral evaluation, we value virtuous actions according to their cost to ourselves. We praise to the highest degree the strength of character of those who know how to resist all temptations and how to overcome all obstacles. Far from giving ourselves the right to subordinate the rule of our own behaviour to our ephemeral, subjective moods, we acknowledge that we must measure it by that which we demand of others. 'Whatever you wish people to do for you, do the same for them.' This is what the Holy Scriptures enjoin us to do.And the Qur'an insists: Do not give away the bad things that you yourself would only accept with your eyes closed. 2:267 The Prophet of Islam goes so far as to make this egalitarian love the very condition of faith. 'Nobody can call himself a believer if he does not like for his brother that which he likes for himself.' 11° From this unanimous condemnation of selfishness in all its forms, the conscience of the ordinary person has already taken the principle of the universality and reciprocity of duty. 

Thus, from the beginning, Kant only took note of this law, establishing it as an act of the conscience. Although he himself has shown how such antique statements are insufficient for providing a full ethical system,it is, however, the idea they inspired that nevertheless constitutes his entire system. Indeed, he refers to the judgement of 'the most ordinary mind' in order to establish his essential rule of judgement - subject to the laws of practical pure reason, a rule which he formulates as follows: 'Ask yourself that if the action that you intend to do happens according to a natural law of which you make yourself a part, do you still consider it possible for you to will it?' 'For instance,' he continues, 'everyone knows very well that if one person were to permit himself to cheat in secret, that would be no reason for everyone else to do the same; that if he were to be completely indifferent to the misery of others, it would not mean that everyone should feel the same towards him.'112 b) Where does this implacable demand for an ideal action which is not modelled on any experience come from? The founder of practical formalism explains that it arises because moral law transports us in an ideal fashion to a sphere which is completely different from that of empirical law. It allows us to participate in a pure, intelligible world, wherein the autonomy of the will consists not only in its being independent of the natural law of the senses, which is only a negative aspect of freedom, but also in the fact that the will gives itself its own law. This law must be that of pure reason, which is not only free of every empirical condition, every intuition and every substance, but also capable of determining the will a priori; for pure reason is so constituted that, in its practical as well as in its theoretical usage, it is 'one and the same reason which judges according to a priori principles'.Now, there is nothing but the pure form of universal legislation which is capable of determining the will a priori. This is why every pronouncement must adapt itself to this form, at the risk of being morally impossible. 

Therefore, not only is this universality similar to that of natural law, by which an ordinary judgement must guide itself like a principle that is typical of pure reason, but it is an absolute universality applicable to all reasonable beings, finite and infinite, with its foundation upon an apodictic judgement, that is to say necessary and a priori, of pure reason. Kant states this fundamental law of pure practical reason thus: 'Act in such a way that the principle determining your will can also be valued as a principle of universal legislation.'Even this still has the appearance of the 'trivial' reason which Kant wished to transcend.