Any moral doctrine worthy of the name is essentially based on the idea of obligation. This is its most fundamental basis, the pivot, the nucleus around which the whole ethical system revolves, whose absence would destroy the very essence and substance of practical wisdom. For, without obligation, there is no responsibility and without responsibility, there can be no return of justice, whence chaos, disorder and anarchy, not just de facto, but de jure, according to the so-called moral principle itself. 

One can see in which way certain modern theoreticians would like to lead us.How can one possibly conceive of a moral rule without an obligation? Is this not a contradiction in terms? Or are we to make the conscience a mere tool of artistic appreciation? Is it not evident that ethics and aesthetics are two distinct entities? In a most profound sense, it is true, anything which is good is beautiful. Is the opposite equally true? Certainly, the idea of virtue has its own intrinsic beauty which the soul can taste even though it may not be pleasing to the eye. But it is something more; by its very nature, it acts and motivates, it makes us want to act in order to make it a concrete reality. On the other hand, reduced to its most simple expression, the notion of beauty has nothing to do with action, especially when its object does not depend on our will. Thus our admiration for divine omnipotence, or for the majesty of the celestial vault, does not induce us to create copies of them. Even when an artist conceives an idea for a great project that he can execute, this idea does not absolutely force him to carry it out, it gently invites him to execute it when he wants to and when he is at leisure to do so. Or even if it imposes itself upon some, it does not impose itself upon others with equal compulsion. In any case, far from going against feelings, it expresses them. Furthermore, although a fault within a work of art may well shock the senses, it will not offend the conscience. It is not something immoral. 

On the contrary, moral good is characterized by this imperative authority over everyone, by this necessity that compels everyone to carry out the same order, whatever might be the state of their actual feelings; a necessity which makes disobedience seem odious and abominable. We shall see later in which form the Qur'an presents this necessity, which it calls camr: imperative, kitaba: prescription and fana: duty. Now that we have stated the principle of obligation and nominally defined it, we must delve deeper into the knowledge of its nature, by examining its sources, its characteristics and its antimonies. 

The sources of moral obligation In his in-depth analysis of moral obligation, the French philosopher Henri Bergson was able to discover two sources: one, the force of social pressure; the other, the force of human, or rather, divine, attraction. 

He explains that to play the role that is assigned to us by society, to follow the route that it has traced for us and to which we abandon ourselves daily through a kind of habit upon which we scarcely reflect, which imitates the instinct of a bee or an ant, is what one ordinarily calls 'carrying out one's duty'. Were we to resist it for an instant and be tempted to modify the prescribed route, we would somehow be led back to it because of the overbearing pressure of collective life. It is altogether different in its second aspect. Although the morality of the crowd is the effect of a collective constraint, that of the privileged is an aspiration towards the ideal. It is a rapture of creative love, which tends not only to orient the conduct of the individual towards a higher direction, but also to bring society along with him and lead it, rather than be led by it. As a description and analysis of a given phenomenon of experience, one can say that the Bergsonian exposition has not omitted much that is essential; as a theory of moral obligation, however, this analysis presents certain difficulties and differs in some respects from the Qur'anic point of view. 

Already, with respect to the description, one could ask - since it concerns the designation of all the forces that act upon the will - why it is that a third factor is not indicated, one more ancient and more deeply rooted in human nature, namely the individual or living element? For what really matters to every fellow citizen is not just to conform to what society dictates and to behave like a cell within an organism, but also, and above all, to seek his own preservation, independently, even at the expense of the group to which he belongs. This we turn to below. 

What is of greater concern in this analysis is that the two terms moral and obligation seem to us to contradict each other, for, from the moment that an obligation becomes a semi-instinctive constraint, it loses its moral qualification; conversely, spontaneous love is the very opposite of obligation. Strictly speaking, true morality is not found here at all, neither in one case nor the other. Man is always presented to us as the toy of conflicting forces: sometimes pushed by instinct, sometimes carried away by emotion, never an independent personality capable of comparing, appreciating and choosing. Now, in order to establish morality, it is not enough for the ideal to present itself to us as the objective of an exalted aspiration, nor for the social imperative to appear as a tyrannical tax. Both must undergo a genuine process in the conscience from which they emerge newly fashioned, based on justice, corroborated and prescribed by reason. As long as the ideal is not invested with this imperative and reasonable disposition, and even when it does not act to pursue a mirage or a fleeting dream, it will remain determined by a certain idea of beauty. This feeling, however noble it may be, is not a moral principle. 

It is the same with any unjustified submission that proceeds from a kind of collective intimidation. This is why we see the Qur'an constantly protesting against these two enemies of morality: the pursuit of impetuous desire and blind conformity. Do not those who wish to continue a tradition without any understanding do so even though their fathers used to walk in ignorance and error?6 Thus, essential elements that have been omitted from Bergson's analysis have left an immense lacuna: a rational element, a properly moral element in the agent and another in the commandment: intelligence, freedom and legitimacy. He has greatly underestimated the representative role of the intellectual faculty, 'the last in line'; he has greatly insisted upon the little effectiveness it offers in the war against passion, but even so, the very essence of morality resides in the reflective activity of the soul. 

In spite of certain errors in the way that he presented his theory, Kant was more correct in claiming to have discovered the source of moral obligation in the highest faculty of the human soul, independent of both inclination and the outside world; he writes: Duty, a sublime and great word ... what origin is worthy of thee and where is the root of thy noble stem to be found ... ? It can be nothing less than that which elevates man above himself ... that which links him to an order of things that the understanding alone can conceive. Belonging both to the intelligible and the sensible worlds, man therefore has a dual nature wherein the nobler (reason) commands the lesser (unfounded selflove). The voice of reason is so clear, 'so insistent, so perceptible for even the grossest of men . . . the boundaries between morality and self-love are so clearly and exactly delimited that even the most ordinary perception cannot fail to know whether something belongs to the one or the other.'Thus reduced to its most simple expression, free of any formalist or transcenentalist subtlety and purified as well of a radical pessimism and certain coldness, the Kantian doctrine is not only incontestable, but we believe that it can also be regarded as similar to the Qur'anic doctrine. 

This book teaches us that the human soul has received the knowledge of good and evil in its primal structure.As well as the faculties of language and the external senses, man is endowed with moral awareness;he already knows the two paths of virtue and vice. It is true that the soul commands to evil, but man is also capable of mastering his inclinations; and for he who controls his faculties and restrains his desires, Paradise will be his home. Even if not everyone exercises such influence upon himself there are nevertheless those who do so with God's help. 'Whenever God wants good for someone', so the Prophet has told us, 'he raises within that person's inner heart a counsellor who exhorts him to act or to abstain.' There is therefore an internal force within man, which can not only advise him and clarify his choice, but which, properly speaking, can also command him to act or not to act. What is this inner authority that claims the right to give orders to our lower faculties, if it is not the enlightened part of our soul, which is reason. Furthermore, the Qur'an says so in its own words, when it articulates the following alternative concerning the unbelievers: Do they follow the command of their reason, or is it that they are an unjust people? 72:32 This verse states the third principle which has been excluded from ethics. 

There is no other justified rule of conduct other than the commandment of reason. It is therefore the sole legitimate authority. 

Within these conditions we can agree with Kant that we are both legislators and subjects. The moral experience of remorse only serves to confirm this duality. Whenever we neglect our duty, we feel we are lowering ourselves to a position which does not belong to us; we tacitly avow that we are a noble, albeit fallen, creature. The Qur'an continually re-awakens andre-instils within us the sense of our original dignity. Not only has God honoured men, extended their dominion over land and seas and favoured them greatly over many We have created;not only has He ordered the angels to prostrate themselves before the father of mankind/a title of honour of which the Qur'an frequently reminds us/but even if we choose to leave aside these external signs of human dignity, and consider them from the point of view of their moral value, it does not seem to us that the Qur'an considers human nature to be intrinsically bad or irremediably corrupt. On the contrary, man was created in the finest mould.It is only those who do not believe and do not practise good works that have a fretful, unstable and that fall lower than the lowest of creatures;it is only those who have a heart and do not think, eyes and do not see, ears and do not hear that make themselves brute beasts or worse still.It is thus a matter of free temporal choice, not transcendental. Everything resides in the good or bad use that one makes of one's superior faculties. Cultivating these faculties ennobles the soul; forsaking them darkens it. The Qur'an does not confine itself to the intellectual faculties alone: it takes greater care to awaken our noblest and most legitimate feelings, but it prompts them into action only under the control of reason. It is always to us that it addresses itself; that is to say, the luminous part of our soul, our faculty of understanding, which weighs the pros and the cons in everything and assesses different values. 

Among the higher feelings that the Qur' an brings to life within us we may give as an one which is found upholding all our social duties, taking the term 'society' in its broadest sense: the sense of human fraternity. In order to present us with a tangible form of the horror that should prevent us from slandering an absent person, the Qur'an compares the slanderer to someone who would like to eat his brother's dead flesh, adding no, you would hate it, every one of you. However, since it addresses our faculty of understanding, are we not to conclude that, in the absence of any positive teaching, man already possesses all the necessary means, both intellectual and affective, to discern what he is to do or to avoid? And so, is it not our concern to legislate on what is good and evil for ourselves? It is necessary to clarify the meaning and import of such an assertion. Are we to limit ourselves to the human point of view, and privilege individual conscience, or to place ourselves in the position of the thing in itself? As long as the notions of good and evil are rationally defined as 'quality or defect', 'in conformity with or contrary to nature', 'worthy of approval or blame', Muslim theologians do not have any difficulty in accepting man's legislative competence in this matter. But is that which we judge to be good or evil according to the light of our intelligence necessarily so in itself? In other words, is it equivalent to the light of divine reason? If so, are we already under obligation to God even before receiving His commandments through His messengers? It is this very point that the theologians continue to debate. The answers that they give us vary, ranging from the rationalists (Mutazilites and Shrites), who affirm that it is universally true, to the Asharites who deny it categorically, to the Maturidites, who accept it only for simple duties. 

But who cannot see that our rationalists have gone too far in their belief in the infallibility of human reason? For is there not at least one domain which is impenetrable to our intelligence? It is the way in which man must worship his Creator. If each and every one of us is left free to organise his own worship, either he will remain perplexed and do nothing, or he will resort to all kinds of imaginary and arbitrary ways. Even in other areas, we must recognise that this natural light, enveloped by inclination and confused by habits, must undergo a kind of refraction and follow a multitude of paths, according to times, places and temperaments. And so it is that beyond certain essential duties, acknowledged by every normal conscience, moral certainty must gradually give way to conjectures, uncertainties and aberrations. 

For instance, what is our duty towards our sensible nature? Are we to grant our desires nothing, to impose upon ourselves sufferings and mortifications, following this way, as in Buddhism, to Nirvana and nothingness? Or is it sufficient to profess, like the Stoics, an indifference towards all the good and the evil things of this world, whilst preferring some to others? Or are we to profit from all the enjoyments of life, whether with prudence and discernment, as the Utilitarians teach, or without rule or method, like Aristippus and the poets of every age? And yet these are all intelligent beings who profess to have investigated human nature and to have brought us all the most unique way of living in conformity with it. 