Any moral doctrine worthy of the name is essentially based on the idea of
obligation. This is its most fundamental basis, the pivot, the nucleus around
which the whole ethical system revolves, whose absence would destroy the
very essence and substance of practical wisdom. For, without obligation, there
is no responsibility and without responsibility, there can be no return of
justice, whence chaos, disorder and anarchy, not just de facto, but de jure,
according to the so-called moral principle itself.
One can see in which way certain modern theoreticians would like to lead
us.1 How can one possibly conceive of a moral rule without an obligation? Is this
not a contradiction in terms? Or are we to make the conscience a mere tool of
artistic appreciation? Is it not evident that ethics and aesthetics are two distinct
entities? In a most profound sense, it is true, anything which is good is
beautiful. Is the opposite equally true? Certainly, the idea of virtue has its own
intrinsic beauty which the soul can taste even though it may not be pleasing to
the eye. But it is something more; by its very nature, it acts and motivates, it
makes us want to act in order to make it a concrete reality. On the other hand,
reduced to its most simple expression, the notion of beauty has nothing to do
with action, especially when its object does not depend on our will. Thus our
admiration for divine omnipotence, or for the majesty of the celestial vault,
does not induce us to create copies of them. Even when an artist conceives an
idea for a great project that he can execute, this idea does not absolutely force
him to carry it out, it gently invites him to execute it when he wants to and
when he is at leisure to do so. Or even if it imposes itself upon some, it does
not impose itself upon others with equal compulsion. In any case, far from
going against feelings, it expresses them. Furthermore, although a fault within
a work of art may well shock the senses, it will not offend the conscience. It is
not something immoral.
On the contrary, moral good is characterised by this imperative authority over
everyone, by this necessity that compels everyone to carry out the same order,
whatever might be the state of their actual feelings; a necessity which makes
disobedience seem odious and abominable. We shall see later2 in which form
the Qur'an presents this necessity, which it calls camr: imperative, kitaba:
prescription and fan~a: duty. Now that we have stated the principle of 
obligation and nominally defined it, we must delve deeper into the knowledge
of its nature, by examining its sources, its characteristics and its antinomies.
1 The sources of moral obligation
In his in-depth analysis of moral obligation, the French philosopher Henri
Bergson was able to discover two sources: one, the force of social pressure; the
other, the force of human, or rather, divine, attraction.
He explains that to play the role that is assigned to us by society, to follow
the route that it has traced for us and to which we abandon ourselves daily
through a kind of habit upon which we scarcely reflect, which imitates the
instinct of a bee or an ant, is what one ordinarily calls 'carrying out one's
duty'. Were we to resist it for an instant and be tempted to modify the
prescribed route, we would somehow be led back to it because of the
overbearing pressure of collective life. It is altogether different in its second
aspect. Although the morality of the crowd is the effect of a collective
constraint, that of the privileged is an aspiration towards the ideal. It is a
rapture of creative love, which tends not only to orient the conduct of the
individual towards a higher direction, but also to bring society along with him
and lead it, rather than be led by it.3
As a description and analysis of a given phenomenon of experience, one can
say that the Bergsonian exposition has not omitted much that is essential; as a
theory of moral obligation, however, this analysis presents certain difficulties
and differs in some respects from the Qur'anic point of view.
Already, with respect to the description, one could ask - since it concerns
the designation of all the forces that act upon the will - why it is that a third
factor is not indicated, one more ancient and more deeply rooted in human
nature, namely the individual or living element? For what really matters to
every fellow citizen is not just to conform to what society dictates and to
behave like a cell within an organism, but also, and above all, to seek his own
preservation, independently, even at the expense of the group to which he
belongs. This we turn to below.
What is of greater concern in this analysis is that the two terms moral and
obligation seem to us to contradict each other, for, from the moment that an
obligation becomes a semi-instinctive constraint, it loses its moral qualification; conversely, spontaneous love is the very opposite of obligation. Strictly
speaking, true morality is not found here at all, neither in one case nor the
other. Man is always presented to us as the toy of conflicting forces:
sometimes pushed by instinct, sometimes carried away by emotion, never an
independent personality capable of comparing, appreciating and choosing. Now,
in order to establish morality, it is not enough for the ideal to present itself to
us as the objective of an exalted aspiration, nor for the social imperative to
appear as a tyrannical tax. Both must undergo a genuine process in the
conscience from which they emerge newly fashioned, based on justice,
corroborated and prescribed by reason. As long as the ideal is not invested with 
OBLIGATION 15
this imperative and reasonable disposition, and even when it does not act to
pursue a mirage or a fleeting dream, it will remain determined by a certain
idea of beauty. This feeling, however noble it may be, is not a moral principle.
It is the same with any unjustified submission that proceeds from a kind of
collective intimidation. This is why we see the Qur'an constantly protesting
against these two enemies of morality: the pursuit of impetuous desire4 and
blind conformity. 5 Do not those who wish to continue a tradition without any
understanding do so even though their fathers used to walk in ignorance and error?6
Thus, essential elements that have been omitted from Bergson's analysis have
left an immense lacuna: a rational element, a properly moral element in the
agent and another in the commandment: intelligence, freedom and legitimacy. He has greatly underestimated the representative role of the
intellectual faculty, 'the last in line'; he has greatly insisted upon the little
effectiveness it offers in the war against passion, but even so, the very essence of
morality resides in the reflective activity of the soul.

In spite of certain errors in the way that he presented his theory, Kant was
more correct in claiming to have discovered the source of moral obligation in
the highest faculty of the human soul, independent of both inclination and the
outside world; he writes:
Duty, a sublime and great word ... what origin is worthy of thee and
where is the root of thy noble stem to be found ... ? It can be nothing
less than that which elevates man above himself ... that which links him
to an order of things that the understanding alone can conceive.7
Belonging both to the intelligible and the sensible worlds, man therefore has a
dual nature wherein the nobler (reason) commands the lesser (unfounded selflove). The voice of reason is so clear, 'so insistent, so perceptible for even the
grossest of men . . . the boundaries between morality and self-love are so
clearly and exactly delimited that even the most ordinary perception cannot
fail to know whether something belongs to the one or the other.'8 Thus
reduced to its most simple expression, free of any formalist or transcenentalist
subtlety and purified as well of a radical pessimism and certain coldness, the
Kantian doctrine is not only incontestable, but we believe that it can also be
regarded as similar to the Qur'anic doctrine.
This book teaches us that the human soul has received the knowledge of
good and evil in its primal structure.9 As well as the faculties of language and
the external senses, man is endowed with moral awareness;10 he already knows
the two paths of virtue and vice. 11 It is true that the soul commands to evil, 12 but
man is also capable of mastering his inclinations; and for he who controls his
faculties and restrains his desires, Paradise will be his home. 13 Even if not everyone 
exercises such influence upon himself there are nevertheless those who do so
with God's help. 'Whenever God wants good for someone', so the Prophet has
told us, 'he raises within that person's inner heart a counsellor who exhorts
him to act or to abstain.' 14 There is therefore an internal force within man,
which can not only advise him and clarify his choice, but which, properly
speaking, can also command him to act or not to act. What is this inner
authority that claims the right to give orders to our lower faculties, if it is not
the enlightened part of our soul, which is reason. Furthermore, the Qur'an says
so in its own words, when it articulates the following alternative concerning
the unbelievers:
Do they follow the command of their reason, or is it that they are an unjust
people? 72:32
This verse states the third principle which has been excluded from ethics.
There is no other justified rule of conduct other than the commandment of
reason. It is therefore the sole legitimate authority.
Within these conditions we can agree with Kant that we are both legislators
and subjects. The moral experience of remorse only serves to confirm this
duality. Whenever we neglect our duty, we feel we are lowering ourselves to a
position which does not belong to us; we tacitly avow that we are a noble,
albeit fallen, creature. The Qur'an continually re-awakens andre-instils within
us the sense of our original dignity. Not only has God honoured men, extended
their dominion over land and seas and favoured them greatly over many We have
created;15 not only has He ordered the angels to prostrate themselves before
the father of mankind/6 a title of honour of which the Qur'an frequently
reminds us/7 but even if we choose to leave aside these external signs of
human dignity, and consider them from the point of view of their moral value,
it does not seem to us that the Qur'an considers human nature to be
intrinsically bad or irremediably corrupt. On the contrary, man was created in
the finest mould.18 It is only those who do not believe and do not practise good
works that have a fretful, unstable nature19 and that fall lower than the lowest of
creatures;20 it is only those who have a heart and do not think, eyes and do not see,
ears and do not hear that make themselves brute beasts or worse still.21 It is thus a
matter of free temporal choice, not transcendental. Everything resides in the
good or bad use that one makes of one's superior faculties. Cultivating these
faculties ennobles the soul; forsaking them darkens it.22
The Qur'an does not confine itself to the intellectual faculties alone: it takes
greater care to awaken our noblest and most legitimate feelings, but it
prompts them into action only under the control of reason. It is always to us
that it addresses itself; that is to say, the luminous part of our soul, our faculty
of understanding, which weighs the pros and the cons in everything and
assesses different values.
Among the higher feelings that the Qur' an brings to life within us we may 
OBLIGATION 17
give as an example23 one which is found upholding all our social duties, taking
the term 'society' in its broadest sense: the sense of human fraternity. 24 In
order to present us with a tangible form of the horror that should prevent us
from slandering an absent person, the Qur'an compares the slanderer to
someone who would like to eat his brother's dead flesh, adding no, you would hate it,
every one of you.25
However, since it addresses our faculty of understanding, are we not to
conclude that, in the absence of any positive teaching, man already possesses
all the necessary means, both intellectual and affective, to discern what he is
to do or to avoid? And so, is it not our concern to legislate on what is good and
evil for ourselves?
It is necessary to clarify the meaning and import of such an assertion. Are
we to limit ourselves to the human point of view, and privilege individual
conscience, or to place ourselves in the position of the thing in itself?
As long as the notions of good and evil are rationally defined as 'quality or
defect', 'in conformity with or contrary to nature', 'worthy of approval or
blame', Muslim theologians do not have any difficulty in accepting man's
legislative competence in this matter. But is that which we judge to be good or
evil according to the light of our intelligence necessarily so in itself? In other
words, is it equivalent to the light of divine reason? If so, are we already under
obligation to God even before receiving His commandments through His
messengers? It is this very point that the theologians continue to debate. The
answers that they give us vary, ranging from the rationalists (Mutazilites and
Shrites), who affirm that it is universally true, to the Asharites who deny it
categorically, to the Maturidites, who accept it only for simple duties.
But who cannot see that our rationalists have gone too far in their belief in
the infallibility of human reason? For is there not at least one domain which is
impenetrable to our intelligence? It is the way in which man must worship his
Creator. If each and every one of us is left free to organise his own worship,
either he will remain perplexed and do nothing, or he will resort to all kinds of
imaginary and arbitrary ways. Even in other areas, we must recognise that this
natural light, enveloped by inclination and confused by habits, must undergo a
kind of refraction and follow a multitude of paths, according to times, places
and temperaments. And so it is that beyond certain essential duties, acknowledged by every normal conscience, moral certainty must gradually give way to
conjectures, uncertainties and aberrations.
For instance, what is our duty towards our sensible nature? Are we to grant
our desires nothing, to impose upon ourselves sufferings and mortifications,
following this way, as in Buddhism, to Nirvana and nothingness? Or is it
sufficient to profess, like the Stoics, an indifference towards all the good and
the evil things of this world, whilst preferring some to others? Or are we to
profit from all the enjoyments of life, whether with prudence and
discernment, as the Utilitarians teach, or without rule or method, like
Aristippus and the poets of every age? And yet these are all intelligent beings 
18 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
who profess to have investigated human nature and to have brought us all the
most unique way of living in conformity with it.
In our relations with our fellow human beings things are not much better,
and we can expect a similar discrepancy of opinion. Thus - to mention only
examples that are already controversial - is a person who has suffered a crime
to seek revenge, or to forgive, or does he have the choice? Are we to treat our
sisters with reserve and severity, or show them brotherly love? Should we
help someone to be virtuous or leave him to his own ways? And if we want to
consider the details of everyday life, such as selling, taking interest, wine,
marriage, incest, and so on, the variation of opinions will be even greater.
Reasons will always be opposed by reasons and feelings by feelings.
Kant indeed saw the perils that strike the morality of the individual
conscience. Beyond a certain point, it is impossible to establish, in effect, a law
which can necessarily be applied to every conscience. Why should I sacrifice
my opinion to yours? It is therefore indispensable to be able to resort to a
higher authority which can decide the matter; and it is certainly not in society
that one can find this authority, since this concerns morality, not legality. We
can see the perfectly fair reason for which Kant wished to demand this
legislation from a higher authority, reuniting the dual moral and universal
characteristics. He thought he had found it in reason itself, in its purest and
most abstract form, which rules everything through the law of noncontradiction. Unfortunately we shall have occasion to record the failure of
such a criterion.26 Kant himself was aware of the powerlessness of his critique
to determine what human duties are specifically, the division of which belongs
to a scientific system and not to a critique of reason in general, which involves
no reference to human nature.27 But what men need precisely is a rule that
they can apply to their nature. In easy cases, anyone can find such a rule
already written in some way in their conscience: no one needs a formal,
abstract entity. But when the need for it arises, this empty idea tells us
nothing precise.
We are therefore forced to look elsewhere. Where are we to find such a
splendid light to illumine our conscience when everywhere it finds nothing
but darkness? Where are we to find this anchor of salvation to which we can
attach our souls, which are tossed about by doubt? To these questions there is
only one answer. Nobody knows more competently and wisely the essence of
the soul, or the law of its development and perfection than the author of its
being.28 It is from the infinite light that I must take my fragment of light. It is
necessary to turn to the absolute, infallible moral conscience to guide one's
own conscience.
It may be that you hate something when it is good for you and it may be that you
love something when it is bad for you. Allah knows and you do not know. 2:216
Instead of 'transcendental reason', one must say 'transcendent reason'; 
OBLIGATION 19
instead of a conceptual abstraction, one must have recourse to this concrete,
living and omniscient reality, which is divine reason. Only revealed light can
assist immanent light; only positive divine law can continue and complete
natural moral law. In the Qur'an, reason and tradition go hand-in-hand. 29 In
the heart of the believer there is a double illumination, whereas the
unbeliever has only one.30

Does this mean that we must distinguish two different sources of moral
obligation? Not at all. Rather, we say two layers of the same source, the least
pure of which is the nearest to the masses. For, on the one hand, this
complementary light is not accessible to us, has no hold on us, nor any moral
sense, except through our individual conscience and on condition that it is
recognised. It is from this source that we receive the immediate command,
whatever the circumstances. It is our human reason which tells us to deliver
ourselves to divine reason. This is why al-Ghazali said that it would be
meaningless to talk of an obligation coming to us from outside of ourselves,
for it would be absurd for us to concern ourselves with something which is of
no value to us, even if we were coerced. 31 On the other hand, when, left to my
natural light, I question myself before taking action in order to know what my
duty is in a relatively clear case, the indication given by my conscience only
has the worth of a moral value in my eyes inasmuch as I believe it to show me,
not a truth that is relative to my feelings, but moral truth itself. All my efforts
of deliberation have the aim of deciphering this truth, which I believe to be
imprinted at the deepest level, indeed in the very essence, of any reasonable
being. Now when we are told that we are our own legislators as members of
the intelligible world, we must agree upon the autonomy that is attributed to
reason. What does the phrase 'reason is its own legislator' mean? Does reason
create the law or does it have it already complete, forming a part of its
structure which it can impose upon the will? For if reason were the author of
the law, it would be absolute master, able to maintain or abolish it as it
pleased. If it is not able do that, it is because the law is pre-established,
engraved by the craftsman who made its nature, like an innate idea which
cannot be removed.
Thus, consulting one's reason simply means to read the book of our pure
and specifically human nature, such as it was created by God. In fact, when the
most hardened of unbelievers refers to the authority of reason, in reality he is
only listening to this divine voice which speaks within us all without saying its
name, although it says it clearly when it speaks to the believer. However, if
both lights, natural and revealed, spring from the one single source, it must be
concluded that, in the last analysis, it is always God who indicates our duty to
us, although in two different forms: internal or manifested.
This brings us to the subject of moral obligation in Islam, in its form as 
positive law. As we move to this new terrain, we must ask ourselves whether
there is one, or several sources of Islamic legislation. It is generally assigned
four: the Qur'an, or 'the Word of God'; the sunna, or 'Tradition of the Prophet';
ijmac, or 'unanimous decision of the community'; and finally, qiyas, or
'reasoning by analogy'.
Now, if the analysis that we have made is correct- except for some details
which will be added to its formulation shortly - there must only be one
legislative authority in the proper sense of the word. In many passages, the
Qur'an confirms this idea. It categorically states:
jurisdiction over it belongs to Allah alone. 6:57; 12:40
jurisdiction belongs to Him alone. 6:63
He is the judge and there is no reversing His judgement.32 The Qur'an presents
the Prophet to us not only as absolutely submitted to the divine law, but as the
very first one to submit to it:
Say: my prayer and my rites, my living and my dying are for Allah alone, the
Lord of all the worlds, who has no partner. This is what I am commanded, and I
am the first of the Muslims. 6:163
What, then, is this fourfold principle?
1) The Qur'an
Since, for Muslims, the Qur'an is the very Word of God, it is entirely qualified,
without any question, for expressing the divine will. Should it not then be
regarded as the sole source of Islamic legislation? To allow another source of
direct and real obligation besides the Qur'an: is it not to associate with God other
types of wisdom claiming the same inviolable right to command? Do we see of
what the authority that is conferred upon other principles actually consists?
2) Thesunna
It is true that everyone agrees that in the practical teachings of the sunna, or
Tradition of the Prophet/3 a second and very important source of Islamic
legislation can be found, in addition to the Qur'an, the Word of God. The
Qur'an itself seems to encourage the faithful to submit to all the dispensations
of the Prophet, even if these were taken on his own initiative.34
However, looking at things deeply, the prophetic dispensations only
become a definitive obligation in any aspect - moral, legal or religious - on
condition that the idea they bear reflects the character of an explicit or
implicit revelation. As soon as the divine character is lacking, the lesson and
example given by the man are no longer authoritative. This distinction is
already indicated in the Qur'anic text: 
OBLIGATION 21
0 you who believe! Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when He calls you to
what will bring you to life! 8:24
The Prophet himself is the one who established this distinction in the most
clear and imperative way: 'If I command you to do something in my own
name, I am but a mortal; but if I bring you something from God, keep it; for I
could not lie on God's account.'35 Not only does he declare that his opinions
concerning the technicalities of material life are fallible, as this side of things
is clearly outside his mission, 36 but in that which concerns the aim of his
divine mission, namely, the moral, legal or ritual order, he can fall into slight
errors when he is not supported by the Revelation. Thus we see the Qur' an
reproaching him on several occasions for having allowed himself to feel too
much sympathy towards the unbelievers, for having too merciful an attitude
in their regard, where he should have been more uncompromising.37 So, in a
case of theft which was referred to him, he erred, being deceived in his
judgement, after which the Qur' an put him right. If there had not been the
assistance of the Revelation, he would have condemned the innocent while
absolving the guilty party.38 Similarly, let us remember the splendid
exhortation that the Prophet addressed one day to a certain number of
litigants before settling their case: 'I am only a human being. You bring your
disagreement before me; but it might be that one of you presents his case
better than the other, and that I give a judgement after his plea. If it ever
happens that I give the advantage to one of you by granting him something
that belongs to his adversary, let him not take it, for my decision would only
give him a piece ofhell.'39
It sometimes happened that, when leading the ritual prayer, he would
unduly omit or add some detail. When questioned: 'Has anything happened to
the ritual?', he would answer: 'If anything had happened I would have told
you; but I am only a man; I forget, just like any of you; when I forget
something, please remind me.' 40
Where he declares himself to be absolutely infallible is, as we have seen,
when he gives an order as being a message from God. Once this message has
been transmitted to its destination, sufficiently explained, and conserved in
the memory of the community, then natural error, which never fails to attract
man's attention, however lofty and enlightened his mind, can very well
happen to him too, with the difference that he never persists in error. If he
does not return by ordinary means, the Revelation will intervene to correct
him and put him back on the right road, otherwise, the whole community
would be induced into error and follow him down an erroneous path.
However:
Allah would never misguide a people after guiding them until He had made it
clear to them what they should avoid. 9:115 
22 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
This means that, in the absence of such a rectification, any of his orders and
judgements that are not contested by the Revelation are regarded as implicitly
approved and therefore they are rightly received as divine commandments. In
the same way, whichever way he behaved is, in principle, also a good example
by which Muslims measure their conduct, provided that he himself did not say
anything to the contrary. Thus, since all authentic ~adrths which are not
abrogated and are part of the Prophet's mission, are actually only another
expression of the divine will, they have for Muslims the same moral authority
as a text from the Qur'an. If the ~adfth contains more detail and precision than
the Qur'anic text, it is this that 'judges' the latter; it explains it, determines its
meaning and establishes its mode of application.41
3) Jjmii c
The above, then, explains the sense and the measure in which the prophetic
tradition can be said to be a principle of obligation. What are we now to think
of the sovereign authority assigned to the other source of legislation, known
as ijmac, or the unanimous decision of the community? The authority of ijmac
can be traced back to some Qur'anic passages, such as:
You are the best nation ever to be produced before mankind. You enjoin the
right, forbid the wrong and have belief in Allah. 3:110
Whether this passage is addressed to the Muslim community in general or,
as is more probable, to the first generation who had witnessed the
Revelation, is of lesser importance: there will always be somewhere a group
of people whose unanimous opinion is sanctioned by the holy Book as being
infallible in moral matters, incapable of allowing something evil or of
forbidding something good. A similar argument in favour of this prerogative
of ijmac can be drawn from another passage, which, having accorded those
among the Muslims who possess the commandment of affairs the same right
of obedience as that which it accords the orders of God and His Prophet,
immediately adds this caution: that in case of controversy, it is necessary to
consult the two main authorities.42 This seems to imply that as long as there
is common agreement, there is no need to look for any other criteria in
order to judge whether any measure dictated by leaders is just. If we consult
the documents which contain this tradition, we can see that this proouncement is not just restricted to the time of the Companions, as one might
have expected from the Qur'anic texts, but extends indefinitely to all
generations of Muslims. To quote one text which is acknowledged as
authentic and which is very explicit in this regard: 'For always, and until
God's will intervenes (to change the order of things), there will remain a
group from my community who will never cease solemnly to uphold truth,
and will not be harmed by the opposition of its adversaries.'43 Since the
party of truth therefore remains to endure, the idea, in Islam, of a 
OBLIGATION 23
unanimous agreement in error is thus excluded as being practically
impossible in the Muslim world.
People have come to regard ijmiic, whatever the era, as the highest,
irrevocable authority which can judge even the texts of the Qur'an and the
~adfth, and cannot itself be judged by them, nor destroyed by any other
previous or later opinion. Muslims in general have submitted to it without
reservation, except for some Kharijites, Muctazilites and Shi"ites.
How, then, are we to reconcile this attitude with the absolute submission
and the deepest veneration that a Muslim must reserve for God, for His Holy
Book and for His Messenger inasmuch as he is God's interpreter and His
spokesman? How, especially, can it be compatible with the logic of Islam,
which strongly condemns any blind conformity and constantly refers to
reason and common sense, even in its most fundamental dogmas? One can
understand just to what degree this doctrine outraged a rationalist such as alNazzam, who declared: 'True ijmac is the opinion whose legitimacy can be
demonstrated, even if it is the opinion of one person.'44 Common agreement is
worth nothing if it is unfounded.
To look at this more closely, we can see that al-Nazzam is neither
completely right nor completely wrong. He is right, because he defends a
principle highly prized in the Qur'an, but he is wrong in believing himself to
have discovered a preliminary condition which everybody else had neglected
before him.
Some clarification is therefore necessary in order to define this ijmac, to
which any Muslim can appeal as a sure legislative authority, founded upon
justice. The term ijmac is normally translated as 'consensus' or 'consensus
omnium'. This literal translation is not quite adequate. The agreement is not
to be thought of as a unanimous vote coming from a plebiscite imposed upon a
whole nation or on all Islamic nations, wherein the most utterly godless and
uncultivated minds would vote alongside the most learned. Nor should we
represent the voting body as a religious council or a public assembly whose
members, elected or nominated, meet under the same roof in order to discuss
certain dogmatic, economic or political questions. Neither in its object nor in
its form does ijma c resemble any of these Western organisations.
Firstly, from the point of view of its object, the role of ijmac is to legislate on
any new problem of a moral, legal or ritual order,45 technical questions about
everyday life, as well as those of theoretical religion being equally excluded
from its competence; material life also, because no text guarantees against an
error that might occur in a communal decision in that domain. Dogmatic
questions are excluded for a very different reason. In effect, if the fallibility of
the entire community on a religious subject of a practical order can be
considered as a possibility that must be excluded, this must equally be so, and
even more so, in that which regards an object of faith. Not everyone even
agrees to making reference to ijmac in this domain. 46 If some tolerate it with
secondary issues, nobody accepts it when it concerns fundamental, dogmatic 
issues. A Muslim does not have the right to have recourse to the authority of
others to establish his faith; there would be a vicious circle if religion were to
be built upon a base which is only established by the religion itself.
As for the conditions in which the vote must be put into effect to constitute
an irrevocable legislative authority, the established rule is very exacting with
regard to the basis, but remains absolutely indifferent to the exterior form
that the organisation of the voting body can adopt. Whether members are
nominated by the state or not, elected by the people or not, whether they may
meet in one plenary session or are scattered all over the world, none of it
affects the legitimacy of the result, provided that it is obtained according to
the regulations. The essential point is that each member, conscious of his
intellectual independence and moral responsibility, freely expresses his
opinion after careful deliberation of the problem at hand. However, the point
that is worth noting is that no one can be considered as a member of this
college unless he already possesses the quality of a specialist and is competent
in the subject; that is to say, if he meets the required conditions which entitle
him to refer directly to the source documents and draw informed conclusions
from them. In other words, not only must all the members have at hand the
necessary documents to solve any problem that arises, but they must also be
experienced in critiquing the texts when they have not already been
established by accredited authorities. They must also know the language in
depth, in its literal as well as its figurative style, and be able to understand the
main ideas as well as those that are secondary, whether they are explicit or
implicit. In addition, they must be well-versed in the history of the Islamic
legislation under consideration, know the specific circumstances (asbab alnuziil) which have determined it and the stages of its evolution (al-niisikh wa'lmansiikh), if there are any. Finally, it is necessary for them to have penetrated
the spirit of the law and the aims it intends to fulfil, through the applications
made by the Prophet and his Companions.
It can be seen that far from being an aggregate of arbitrary, spontaneous (I
would say unconsidered) opinions arising mechanically from imitation, or
animated by a spirit of partiality, ijmac appears to have unity, an identity of
unshakeable convictions which truth imposes upon all enlightened souls. We
know just how much subjective conditions cause our personal views to differ,
to the extent that they diverge too much. However, when it happens that in
such conditions the intellectual effort of each person is deployed according to
his own way of thinking and free from any foreign interference, reaching the
same solution as everyone else, this can only be so because the solution
appeared to each conscience with such clarity that it precluded any
discussion.
The infallibility of ijmac, under consideration here, cannot actually be
attributed to either the thinkers themselves or to any particular text - since
its authenticity may be refuted, or its interpretation considered in different
ways - but to the reference to the well-established and deeply studied 
OBLIGATION 25
collection of Qur'anic and prophetic documents on which our thinkers have
been able to base their judgement.
4) Qiyiis
Whereas the ?:ahirites, a purely exegetical School, preferred to keep to the
three sources mentioned above: kitii.b, sunna and ijmii.c, the other Schools,
authorising themselves on the example of the Companions of the Prophet and
the opinion of the majority of their successors, accept a fourth and last source,
namely qiyiis, or reasoning by analogy. Are we to believe that their doctrine
tends to accord with that type of autonomous, rational legislation denied to
communal decision and to the Prophet himself? Not at all.
Firstly, by its very definition, this reasoning supposes the existence of a
model case, to which one compares the new case; but the type-case must already
be mentioned elsewhere: in the Qur'an, the ~adfth or ijmii.c. Moreover, the
shared characteristic in both cases must either constitute47 or encapsulate48 the
why of the legislation, the reason for which the solution of the original case was
adopted. However, if this common characteristic was explicitly mentioned in
the text, or is unanimously acknowledged as the reason for the original
solution, there is no difficulty, even for the ?ahirite School, to make it the
index, to see the necessary and sufficient condition of the earlier judgement.
There is therefore no difficulty in generalising this statute and applying it
whenever the established motivation can be found. However, in the case
where this motivation, or causal link, can only be adduced through a subtle
effort of reasoning, are we to understand it, with the conclusions that result,
as being implied within the spirit of the revealed legislation? We suggest that
the answer to this question must have various degrees. The reticence of the
?ahirite School at least constitutes a protection against the abuse of
intellectual freedom of some jurists.
The Malikite School, on the contrary, has gone further in the liberal sense.
Referring to the example of the first Muslims, Imam Malik authorises this
inductive reasoning, not only starting from a well-defined text, bringing the
same solution to a particular problem which is analogous to the problem
under scrutiny, but also starting from general processes to which the law has
had recourse in innumerable matters more or less related to the question at
hand, which together emerge as one certain idea: that such a type of good is
an essential aim which the law seeks to realise by all means possible. The new
case only presents us with another means, before being used when it appears
in its turn, in order to realise the generic good, which Malik called al-m~la~a
al-mursala, or 'indeterminate good'. It is in virtue of this principle that this
scholar was able to resolve a certain number of moral and legal problems in a
rather original way, even though it clashed somewhat with the letter of the
law.49
However far you search through the various currents of legal thought in
Islam, one truth remains indubitable: It is that the ultimate goal for which all 
legislators aim in their various ways is to reach this unique source from which
everyone far and wide must draw: the divine decision. This decision the
Qur' an records first; the ~adlth then comment upon it and define it. If both
texts are silent, qiyiis attempts to discover it in its deepest spirit and meaning;
lastly ijmac intends to take it from all the evidence together. God alone is
therefore the legislator; the others are but direct or indirect transmitters of
His decree.

As yet we still have not touched upon the deepest root of moral obligation in
the Qur'an. Up to now, we have been able to bring natural moral law back to a
kind of divine law, already implied within the very structure of human reason.
We have then shown how this partial light is not sufficient to supply us with a
law which is concrete, complete and universal, and shown the necessity, in
order to obtain this threefold character, of having recourse to an authority
which, transcending human beings, can enlighten them enough through a
positive teaching which is sufficiently precise. This authority, which must be
endowed with absolute consciousness and infinite light, can only be that of
the Perfect Being. We have finally reduced all sources of this positive law to
one unique source, and all commandments to one commandment, whether
explicitly or implicitly expressed: that of God.
However, the Qur'an does not present this divine commandment as
absolute power, sufficient in itself to establish the realm of duty for us. On the
contrary, it is edifying to see with what care the Book often tries to attach its
justification to each resolution of the law, and to each precept the moral value
which constitutes the established benefit. When for instance, it invites us to
accept any conciliatory move from our neighbour, even if it is not to our
advantage, it supports this recommendation with this aphorism:
reconciliation is better 4:128
In the same way, when it prescribes for us the duty to fill the measure and to
weigh with fair scales, it adds:
that is better and gives the best result 17:35
To justify the rule of modesty which asks men to lower their gaze and master
their senses, it gives this explanation:
that is purer for them 24:30
Having commanded us to examine a case well before judging it, it continues: 
OBLIGATION 27
in case you wrong others unwittingly 49:6
When it commands that debts should be recorded in writing, as well as the
date of their repayment, it comments:
doing that is more just in Allah's sight, more reliable as testimony, and the best
way of avoiding doubt between you 2:282
Rather than us adding to the examples of particular commandments, it is
enough to see how the Qur'an encourages us to strive for spiritual values and
quality in general, rather than quantity:
The bad and the good are not the same, even though the abundance of the bad
may tempt you. 5:100
the garment of virtue is the best 7:26
he who has been given wisdom has been given great good 2:269
It even allows us to witness the fundamental principle which inspires all of the
divine legislation, formulated thus:
Allah does not command indecency. 7:28
Allah commands justice and doing good. 16:90
So, what we assumed to be the last link in the chain of references does not
prove to be so. Divine reason does not hold the form of its verdict as the
primary principle of moral obligation any more than human reason. It too
claims reference to another criterion. It directs us back to the very essence of
duty, to the quality of the action, to its intrinsic value. It is in its accord with
this objective truth that the commandment justifies itself in our eyes; it is
through this that it solicits our adherence, and it is upon this that it
establishes its moral command.
Only, we do not see for ourselves the profound character which constitutes
the essence of the just and the good per se, whenever and wherever it appears.
As with any essence, we do not see it directly and in its totality; we only catch
a glimpse of it, thanks to this fragment of light, so limited in extent and
intensity, which we contain in our nature. There is only one pure and
unlimited light that can encompass it adequately and with complete certainty.
And it is precisely for this reason that believers have the right to take divine
reason as the most perfect moral guide which can direct them to it. It is
therefore in the notion of value that the true source of obligation resides. It is
the reason of reason, and the ultimate reference of morality. 
2 The characteristics of moral obligation
Any law (whether it be physical, social, logical or anything else) necessarily
and invariably rules all individuals who are subject to it, and the self-same
individual in various circumstances, otherwise, that law would not be a law,
which is to say a general and constant rule. Despite being of a very
particular nature, the law of duty is nevertheless invested with this common
characteristic: it is both universal and necessary. The universal charcteristic
of moral law appears in the Qur'an with undeniable clarity. Not only do all of
its commandments address to the whole of mankind50 that which can be
understood in a partial sense, but also the same rule, whether it is one of
justice or of virtue in general, must always be applied to oneself as it is to
others,51 to one's kin as it is to strangers, to the rich as it is to the poor,52
outside of the community as it is inside;53 whether it concerns a friend or an
enemy.54 Even in cases where the text of the law does not contain a general
term; even if it is given to suit a particular event, in principle it is held to be
universal, which is to say that it can be extended to all analogous cases. That
is what the Prophet stipulated.55 As long as the analogy is so clear that it is
virtually identical, which is to say that so long as the two cases are
differentiated only by negligibly individual characteristics (such as people,
times and places), it is unanimously accepted that a judgement passed in the
case of one person may be extended to all. The fiercest critics of qiyiis, Ibn
.f:Iazm for example, uphold this principle and strongly defend it as a
necessary consequence of the universality of the Prophet's mission and of
the equality of all before the law. As we have seen, it is only when the
characteristic shared by both is not concretely obvious and emerges only
through an incisive rational process that the principle of reasoning through
analogy becomes a source of controversy among different Muslim jurists.
This is, however, only a detail which does not undermine the general
principle.
The universal nature of duty not only means that it extends to all
individuals; it also implies that it can be applied to the various circumstances
in which one individual may find themselves. This kind of universality is
wrongly called absolute necessity. We shall see later how this term cannot
strictly be applied to the Qur'anic notion of duty. Duty as it is established by
the Qur'an is only imposed on mankind to the extent that it is possible; but it
is necessary in this sense that it must not yield to our subjective states or our
personal interests. The Qur'an tells us that it is the sceptics or those in whose
hearts is a disease who obey the law only inasmuch as they profit by it; while
those who have faith submit to it unconditionally.56 The Qur'an not only extols
generosity which is shown both in times of comfort and of adversity,57 and
courage which braves hunger, thirst and tiredness, but it also severely
condemns those who allow such inconveniences to prevent them from
carrying out their duty. 5
8 When the divine law speaks, as it tells us in its own
terms, it is not for any man or woman of the believers to have any choice about it. 5
9 
OBLIGATION 29
Can any stronger expression be found to establish the necessity with which
duty is imposed?
We must not, however, confuse this expression with either of the other two
meanings of the word necessity: moral necessity is different from both physical
necessity and logical necessity. Physical law exercises over our bodies a
constraint to which we submit, involuntarily and inevitably; moral law, on the
other hand, supposes freedom of choice; it is an obligation, but does not
constrain us physically. From the beginning it leaves us the choice (at the risk
of a later reaction) of whether to observe it or violate it. It is the primordial
rule that the Qur'an ceaselessly proclaims, as much for the duty of faith as for
practical virtue.60
Thus, faced with duty, one has the choice de facto, but one does not have it
de jure. Moral necessity is therefore not existential, but ideal. It must not be
confused at all with logical necessity. That which is logically necessary
impresses itself upon the mind as a given. We cannot fail to see what the
evidence shows us. That which is morally obligatory imposes itself upon the
will as something which does not yet exist, but which must be. It is the result
of a judgement of value, not a judgement of reality. The realm of duty is thus
presented with its own original characteristic. It constrains neither the senses,
nor the intellect, but imposes itself solely upon the conscience.
Kant, however, believed that he could trace immorality back to the absurd
or the irrational. No unjust rule, he said, can be established as a universal law
without leading to a contradiction, either within its very concept, or in the
will which endeavours to elevate it to a universallevel.61
In considering some examples by which the German philosopher wished to
illustrate his argument, Bergson stated that he could only adhere to it on
condition that any of such concept be understood, not in its simple, material
definition, but with the inclusion of its obligatory nature and all of its ethical
conditions. Thus, he explains, it would be contradictory for someone to whom
one had entrusted a deposit, with the express or tacit arrangement for it to be
returned, to then keep it, since the deposit would no longer be a deposit.62
However, is it not evident that, even though it is so limited, Kant's thesis
still remains unproven? We even say that it is impossible to prove, no matter
what dialectical skills are used, because, from the fact that an engagement
taken yesterday has been reneged upon today, there certainly results a
contrast between two opposite positions, but hardly a contradiction in the real
sense of the word. 'The engagement was to have been kept' is a de jure
proposition. 'It was not' is a de facto proposition. What internal impossibility is
there to uphold these two assertions? As long as the two terms of the
opposition do not proceed from the same source and are not related to the
same references; as long as the affirmation and negation do not fall
simultaneously upon the same matter and in the same conditions, there
cannot be any logical contradiction, unless a new terminology is invented.
'Reason demands', yes, indeed it does, always. 'The senses agree or refuse', 
30 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QUR' AN
alas! but it is the law ... such is the eternal struggle between ideal and reality,
between moral law and the law of nature. The best proof of their noncontradiction is that they function simultaneously; the contradictory being
what is most obviously expelled from the realm of reality. Instead of using the
term contradiction, whoever maintains calling things by their name will only
say: 'It was an annoyance' or 'It was a disappointment'. An annoyance for the ideal
which should permeate reality and which is prevented from doing so; a
disappointment for moral consciences with their worthy expectations.
We do not want to play with words. One may call this action by which a
deposit becomes no longer a deposit whatever one chooses. The point which
demonstrates that the moral fault does not reside in this simple alteration is
that one ethical factor is enough to change its quality in order for it to be
blameless (for example, a concession made by the owner to the trustee).
Instead of the issue of turning back on the moral obligation to keep one's
word after it has been accepted, let us now consider the promise of such a
person who allows themselves, in an hour of need, to make a false promise.
What exactly will happen when we convert this statement into a universal
law? Without doubt, elevated to this level, the action by which a man
permits someone to cheat others will compromise the one by which he does
not want to be cheated himself. The opposition now seems to have been
transported to the legal realm, but does this antagonism imply a real
contradiction: wanting and not wanting to be cheated? We believe that this
apparent opposition is only due to a certain equivocation in the term 'to
want', which here plays a dual role, both active and affective. In effect, our will
- in the proper sense of the word: the faculty to decide - may very well enjoy
taking the risk of laying down a general order which can extend to affect
that which we mistakenly call 'will' and which is nothing else than our
sensitivity, or faculty to desire. It is in this way that a judge wants, and finds
universally just, the punishment of the culprit, even if he would not like
being punished himself, if he were similarly guilty. Or to take up again the
example of the false promise, does not the very fact of allowing others to
cheat imply that the astute liar believes he can frustrate their deceit and
escape their trap, without having to change his view?
But, they tell us, by removing the trust from the word that has been given,
does not the principle of a false promise destroy the very idea of a promise,
which assumes that it will be believed? It is easy to expose the contrivance by
which several notions are forced into one. Despite that, it does not contradict
the idea of a promise, either in its essence or in its existence, or in the
possibility of it influencing people - since some will always believe anything -
but only in the certainty of its outcome. This is far from a logical necessity.
What is logically necessary presents itself to us as an analytical and static
truth; it is the agreement of the idea with itself, whereas moral necessity is
rather of a synthetic and dynamic order: it qualifies a relationship between
two different realms; it is the progression of the idea towards its coming into 
OBLIGATION 31
being. This is certainly not to say that its essence is in itself sufficient for it
actually to exist, as with Descartes' idea of the perfect being, since a moral
concept cannot be applied in reality except by the activity of a free and
voluntary agent. It is necessarily conceived by such an agent as a value worthy
of being realised, inciting his will to bring it into being. In a word, it is the
demand of a practical ideal claiming its right to exist. With this notion of
practical value, we leave the realm of the general characteristics that all laws
have in common, to pass on to the characteristics which are specific to moral
law.
Thanks to a remarkably penetrating mind, Kant well understood the great
difference which radically separates the moral rule from all other practical
rules. This difference resides in the Aristotelian idea of end and means: that
which must be sought for itself, or for something else. This is an idea rich in
possibilities which Kant has fortunately known how to utilise and which we
also retain, while disengaging it from Kantian formalism. In effect, although
the art of living, with its rules of skill and prudence, only seriously requires us
to act from the motive of a desirable aim, moral law alone demands action for
its own sake, in virtue of the intrinsic value it possesses. Only the command of
duty can truly be called obligation; the other imperatives are just simple advice
indicating the means to anyone who wishes to attain the end.
We provisionally leave aside the question of whether man is ever able to
view his duty in such an impartial light. We do not now place ourselves at the
point of view of the agent and we will discuss later63 the doctrine which makes
this ideal purity of intention a strict duty. Like Kant, we only maintain that,
since any consideration of the consequence is alien to the idea of duty, moral
law as such hardly needs an extrinsic value to justify its command. In order to
establish its authority, it is necessary and sufficient that action be presented as
obligatory or good in itself, without taking any account of its result, be it
pleasant or unpleasant. To replace one of these considerations with the other
would be to reverse the order of things, and not to proceed as a moral
philosopher. Nevertheless, it is true that an action can be at the same time just,
useful and pleasant. It is not forbidden to the legislator to add to the
justifications of his order, but then he no longer simply plays the role of a
moralist: he adds others to his office, which are not always compatible. An
expert educator may even have to resort to this procedure to ensure that his
teaching is effective. This addition is all the more justified when it concerns
the education of beginners, but in proportion to the progress that is
accomplished, morality becomes more and more pure, until it can finally
support itself. It seems that it is by this progressive method that the Qur'an
has proceeded in its teaching of ethics.64
Parallel to this characteristic of moral obligation, as seen from a legislative
point of view, we have to mention another characteristic, from the point of
view of application: it is that a moral action never consists of a physical deed
which is unconscious, involuntary or unintentional. Whereas legality is satisfied 
32 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
with the act itself, and with the dry letter, morality always requires its spirit.
Even without taking part in the famous debate among Muslim scholars
concerning the absolute necessity to perform one's duty solely out of duty, it
is undeniable that in Islam the sanctity of duty demands at least that one
contemplate one's action before taking it. It is absolutely necessary that, at
that moment, the mind adopts such an attitude that the act is not considered
simply in its physical aspect, but expressly in regard to its obligatory
characteristic. If not, an action which completely conforms to the letter of the
law remains like an empty gesture, a profane object, without any moral
value. 65 So, the law of duty is characterised by the fact that it is a law of freedom
and reason, of intrinsic value and is essentially spiritual in its activity.
We shall now return to its general characteristics, which it shares with all
other laws, in order to present them in their precise Qur'anic form. We have
seen how, from the Qur'anic point of view, this law is necessary and universal;
however, this does not make it absolutely unconditional. What are its
conditions? There are three: one concerns human nature in general; another,
the concrete reality of life; the third, the hierarchy of actions.
A The possibility of action
It might seem superfluous to emphasise the idea of the physical possibility of
an action as a sine qua non condition of moral obligation. Not only does the
conscience of the common man acknowledge as an innate truth that nobody is
bound to perform what is impossible, but it is even stated in numerous
Qur'anic passages, such as:
Allah does not burden any soul with more than He has given it. 65:7
We do not burden any soul with more than it can bear. 6:152; 23:62
Allah does not burden ... (the same phrase) 2:286
The circumstances in which this last text was revealed can help us to
determine the sense of this impossibility, which is considered to be
incompatible with obligation. In an earlier verse, it is stated:
Whether you reveal or conceal your thoughts, Allah will call you to account. 2:284
Holding to the letter of this general statement, the Companions of the Prophet
believed that it applied to everything which occurred within the conscience:
ideas, decisions, desires, dreams, fantasies, and so on. They immediately came
pleading to the Prophet, deploring their inability to obey, saying: 'We are not
masters of our involuntary thoughts or of our inner voice.' He replied to them:
'Do you mean that, like your predecessors, the people of the Book, you say:
"We have heard but we disobey"? Say rather: "We have heard and we obey".' 
OBLIGATION 33
Then there was66 a revelation explaining the text mentioned above: 'Obligation
is only imposed on people according to their ability.' Thus they understood
that the various states of the soul which do not submit to the will were not
and could never be the direct object of an obligation, no more than are the
reflexes, instincts, appetites and natural inclinations. This is why all
imperatives relating to love and hate, fear or hope, have been interpreted in a
rational manner by the commentators, in a way that links them to a previous
action, the cause of these states, or a contiguous or later action, but never to
anything involuntary. This is how the love for God, an emotional and
involuntary state in itself, may be acquired through a voluntary act: the
contemplation of the infinite goodness of the divine and the remembrance of
the blessings that it bestows on us, for people are made in such a way that the
services rendered to them determine their love for their benefactors. It is in
this indirect sense that love of God is the object of a commandment in the
~adlth: 'Love God for the goodness that He never ceases to shower on you.'67
Loving our neighbour can also be determined through comparable methods or
through even more appropriate practices, which we find in a beautiful
example recommended by the Prophet: 'Forgive one another (or shake hands)
and your resentments will disappear; exchange presents, so as to foster
mutual friendship.' 68
By contrast, the command, 'Do not become irritated or angry'69 seems to
aim at the effects of this emotion, rather than its causes. What is meant is: do
not allow yourself to be drawn into the unforeseen consequences of anger;
resist urges pulling you the wrong way and redirect them elsewhere. 70
In the face of irrefutable evidence one does not only give one's
acquiescence to belief itself, which is not regarded as a derivative obligation,
since it is given. This is why, in order to summarise all the pieces of advice
concerning faith, the Qur'an gathers them all into one: engage in meditative
reflection in solitude, or in the company of one other person, in other words,
far from the influence of the crowd.71
Islamic history, however, has witnessed a prolonged debate between
Ashcarites and Muctazilites concerning this question: can God not only place
upon people an unbearable burden (taklzf mii Iii yutiiq), but even oblige them do
the impossible (takllf al-muMI)? The strange thing is that, whereas the
Muctazilites, who in principle give free rein to reason, defend the letter of the
text here, the Ashcarites, who often carry the standard of Muslim orthodoxy
(without always being, it must be acknowledged, its best representatives), take
the opposite position and teach the possibility, even the legitimacy, for God to
place upon us that which is beyond our strength, to oblige us to carry out that
which cannot be done, even the absurd. The reason for this reversal of
position will become easier to ascertain if we place the controversial point
within each doctrinal framework.
In Muctazilite thought, this position is linked to a rational system which
seeks to reach, through reason alone, the very essence of the Supreme Being 
and the moral laws which inform His actions, as well as those which He
imposes on us. What is more, once they know the divine laws, they deduce a
whole succession of defined rules, from which God can never deviate. God is
good, wise and just. So, they state, whatever is in itself incompatible with
these attributes, or which we conceive as such in all certainty, must not,
cannot, be done by God; whence the following rules, among others: God must
not create anything without considering its useful ends for his creatures
(ricayat al-~ala~); and out of two possible good actions, He must perform the
better one (riciiyat al-~la~); God must not intervene in our voluntary actions,
either to determine them or to prevent them; conversely, he must arm us with
equal power over two opposites and allow us to choose freely between them;
one who obeys must be rewarded by God; one who disobeys without repenting
must be punished by God and not forgiven, otherwise, He would commit an
injustice. Is it a question of the nature of our duties towards God, towards
ourselves, or others? These necessarily proceed from the nature of good and
evil; and we have virtually an innate knowledge of this nature. Even if God had
not manifested His will in the Scriptures, if He had not revealed His
commandments to His Messengers, we would have known them all the same,
and would have been bound to follow them. The Scriptures and Messengers
only confirm and explain what we know through reason.
It was in order to counteract these great aspirations, this excessive
confidence in human reason, that the Ashcarites undertook to combat the
arguments of the Muctazilites, one by one. of course, this polemical spirit
could sometimes lead them to commit the opposite abuses. Wishing to counter
argument with argument, the Ashcarites at first failed to proceed on solid
philosophical grounds, or in any case those that were less dangerous, from
what might be called a negative position, which consisted of objecting to the
arbitration of reason in these matters, given the incommensurability of the
finite human mind with infinite things. But, on positive grounds, they failed to
find any wiser a solution, a constructive and truly Qur'anic solution
reconciling opposing attributes without neglecting or exaggerating any
particular one. Thus it is that the Qur'an teaches us that Allah ordains whatever
He wills.72 How is it possible to understand this statement in an absolutely
arbitrary sense when He confirms elsewhere that:
Allah will judge with justice. 40:20
Here are the same opposing attributes in a different form. In one text it is said:
As for my punishment, I strike with it anyone I will 7:156
but in the same text we find:
My mercy extends to all things 7:156 
OBLIGATION 35
and in another text:
Why should Allah punish you if you are thankful and have trust in Him? Allah is
Responsive, Aware. 4:147
In the same way, when the Qur'an declares that God could cause the destruction of the human race, the just as well as the guilty/3 or that nothing can
oppose the crushing burdens He places upon us, nor the harsh measures that
He takes against us/4 is it not clear that the conditional form is rarely transformed into the present? One may even state that it will never happen, since:
He has made mercy incumbent on Himself. 6:13
Instead of underlining divine omnipotence, which the Muctazilites had
avoided emphasising; instead of making it comparative to divine wisdom,
which the Muctazilites had highlighted, our ardent, but not very prudent,
theoreticians virtually suppressed the latter in favour of the former, but while
conserving it in name only.
When we come across a well-arranged piece of work, perfectly organised,
each part having its function within the whole; or when we see an action lead
to good consequences, we have the habit of explaining these things by means
of other things; of taking a connection in space or in time, a structural
interdependence, or a historical sequence, for an intentional finality.
Anthropomorphism! the Ashcarites say; this human interpretation does not
apply to the providential order where, according to them, there is no finality
at all. God does what He wills and is indifferent to any outcome. God does not
will one thing in order to achieve another; He wills both by one and the same sovereign
act. So be itl we say, but in spite of this aimless, unbalanced voluntarism,
should they not acknowledge that the realm of the will and existence is more
limited than that of possibility and omnipotence? Then, nothing prevents all
that God creates or commands from being in conformity with the
requirements of justice and goodness, even though He is not bound by them.
In this particular case, we will be satisfied provided we are reassured that, if
not de jure, then at least de facto, and following a constant and invariable law,
God only obliges people according to their strength.
The most reasonable of the Ashcarites understood this, but others went
further, led by their love of polemics.75 They tried to find an ingenious means
of establishing the obligation to do the impossible per se not only as a right of the
divine power, but as an already accomplished fact. And with exemplary
temerity, they claimed to find concrete examples of it in the Qur'an itself. This
is their precious discovery: It is the case of certain unbelievers to whom the
Qur'an had announced that they would die in a state of unbelief, despite all the
efforts made to convert them.76 However, these people were nonetheless
required to believe all revealed truths, including that of their everlasting 
36 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QuR' AN
unbelief, thus to do the impossible: (1)- because nothing which God knows to
be impossible can ever exist; (2) - it would even be contradictory to believe
this particular revelation, after which they would never believe, since that
would be to believe and not to believe. Adding some comments to this twofold
argument, Fakhr al-Din al-Razi presented it as the most irrefutable proof from
which rationalism could never escape.77
However, supposing that its premises are true, we can only see various
specious paralogisms in this twofold argument. The first argument, which is
derived from divine foreknowledge, is based on a confusion between two
clearly distinct metaphysical notions: the possible and the real, essence and
existence. It is not because a thing does not exist or never will exist that it is
impossible in itself. Science does not change the essence of things, any more
than their reality. It copies it, reproduces it and expresses it. If all that God
knows as inexistent is impossible, we must also, for the same reason, say that
everything He knows as existent is necessary: what is then left in the universe
for the exercise of the divine will?
As for the second argument, it arises from a logical confusion between two
types of propositions, one independent and the other subordinate. To believe
and not to believe are indeed contradictory, supposing that all requisite
identities have been established, but to believe in never believing is an actual fact
for the one who does not believe; since he feels it within himself, he knows it
through the most immediate and intimate experience.
As all their attempts failed in the Qur'anic domain, our polemicists directed
their search towards a wider, purely rational area; and they now wanted to
demonstrate to us that the obligation to do the impossible, far from being an
isolated case in divine legislation, is a general rule from a certain point of view.
In order to defend human freedom, their adversaries, the Muctazilites,
placed that freedom prior to the action, in that moment when everyone
experiences their dual power to act or to refrain. The Ashcarites objected that
before acting, power is only virtual, whereas real power is contemporaneous
to the action;78 now this power only ever affects these two contrasts
alternately. While occupied with one, the other remains impossible, as long as
the first is in the process of being enacted. He who disobeys an order and
applies his activities elsewhere is therefore incapable of obeying it while his is
disobeying it; however, at the very same time, he is obliged to carry out his
duty. On this account, cases that are said to be exceptional, where the aim of
the obligation is unrealisable, are at least as numerous as regular cases.
But who cannot see that this is pure sophistry. Nobody has ever dreamed of
interpreting an order given to someone who is disobeying it as an obligation
to be obeyed at the same time as they are disobeying it. It is very clear that it is
simply a matter of inviting them to stop their opposition and to replace their
activity with one that is moral. If some insist on calling such an action
impossible, that is only a false problem. Although they do not fall into
agreement on the definition of the word, the two opposite camps find 
OBLIGATION 37
themselves in agreement on the facts themselves - and the principle that we
defend remains intact.
B Gentle practice
Everything which cannot be subject, either directly or indirectly, to our power
has now been eliminated from the realm of obligation. This elimination
cannot only be a part of Islamic ethics; it must constitute the characteristic
that is common to all just and reasonable ethics, more particularly to all
revealed ethics, since the contrary is evidently incompatible with divine
justice and wisdom. The purport of the texts cited above only confirms this
point. In effect, the texts present this condition in such a categorical and
universal way that we are entitled to interpret them as the statement of a law
which God made for Himself, and which is applicable to all human beings at all
times.
Here now are other texts which not only exclude anything from Islamic law
which is absolutely impossible, but also any burden which would normally be
unbearable, and any difficulty which would exhaust human strength, let alone
be beyond it. The Qur'an declares:
Allah desires ease for you; He does not desire difficulty for you. 2:185
He has selected you and not placed any constraint upon your religion. 22:76
Allah desires to make things lighter for you. Man was created weak. 4:28
We have only sent you as a mercy to all the worlds. 21:106
We hear in these words a very new tone. Whereas the first condition,
possibility, had been presented as an eternal truth, independent of space and
time, we only find here moderate statements introducing this second
characteristic, gentleness, as a historical fact attached to the community to
whom the message is addressed, the followers of Islam. If this is not to say that
it is a specifically Islamic characteristic, at least the systematic absence of a
general statement on this subject suggests the idea that it is not common to all
revealed laws. Now this idea, which can only be deduced here by the inference
of the contrast in style, appears clearly expressed elsewhere:
Our Lord, do not place on us a load like the one You placed on those before us. 2:286
Therefore, there was a heavy burden imposed in a previous revelation. In
which religion? What was this burden?
Commentators give several examples regarding the second point, but this is
not the place to verify their historical value. Regarding the first point, the
expressions that some of them have used allow us to understand that it 
38 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QuR' AN
concerns all the previous religions, from which Islam is detached by a kind of
mysterious privilege. If we abide by the instructions of the Qur'an, we believe
we may be able to give a more reliable and definite answer to these two
questions.
In the middle of a dialogue which the Qur'an reports as having occurred
between God and Moses following the sudden death that struck seventy
Israelites on Mount Sinai, we notice a sentence very similar to the one with
which we are presently concerned, giving it all the more an explanatory value,
as it uses the same word as ours:
My mercy extends to all things but I will prescribe it for those ... who follow the
Messenger, the unlettered Prophet ... who relieves them of their heavy loads and
the chains which were around them. 7:156-7
The people of Israel and the jewish religion can therefore serve as an
example in order to clarify the text in question, but to what extent? Are we to
consider the two texts as co-extensive or, on the contrary, should we delve
further back in history and, extending this example to former religions,
conclude with the privilege of Islam on this point? Our position is clearly
unfavourable towards this last hypothesis, for the following reasons.
First, one cannot describe as burdensome a religion such as that of
Abraham, to which Islam ceaselessly appeals and to which the Qur' an
attributes the same characteristic of mercy.79 Second, according to the
Qur'anic passages themselves, the difficulties inflicted on the people of Israel
(such as the Sabbath and the prohibition of certain foods) were not part of the
original religion. They were later commands, in order to punish them for their
bad conduct:
The Sabbath was only enjoined on those who differed about it. 16:124
Because of wrongdoing on the part of the jews, We made unlawful for them some
good things which had previously been lawful for them. 4:160
The nature of the forbidden foods, to which this passage alludes, is explained
in detail in another passage of Sura 6, ending with this conclusion:
that is how We repaid them for their insolence. 6:147
Therefore Islam only re-established things in their normal order, which,
according to the Qur'an, is the mission that jesus was commissioned partially
to fulfil. 80 Finally, in the third place, it cannot easily be understood how divine
goodness should, from the very beginning, wish to establish an institution that
would weigh so heavily on man, this feeble creature, and that would be so
difficult as to make him groan under the weight of its burden, as the Arabic 
OBLIGATION 39
word 'i~r' signifies. At the most, according to some confessions, we might
speak of a relative difficulty in performing certain duties, or of an extended
margin of freedom of initiative or freedom of choice. Whatever it is, we will
not expand too much on this subject, which demands a more detailed
comparative study and we now return to our starting point in order to see,
through several examples, certain aspects of this practical gentleness which
accompanies Qur'anic imperatives.
One of the first aspects consists of the fact that, far from prescribing
excessive zeal in pious behaviour, such as spending the night in prayer, the
Qur'an discourages it and indicates that it has several disadvantages. We know
that at the beginning of his mission, the Prophet was requested to spend a
greater part of the night in praying and reciting the Qur' an;81 that, following
his example, several of his Companions took up the custom of doing the same.
Now, we read in the subsequent verses of the same sura about a lesson that
was addressed to this group, bringing it to their attention that they would not
be able to continue this practice in circumstances such as illness, travelling
and fighting, and recommending them to remain awake only as and when the
conditions of their lives allowed it.82 Later in Medina, the same excessive spirit
of devotion appeared among some practitioners, and was equally condemned
as an abuse, opposed to the spirit of the law.
It appears from the corpus of Qur'anic and prophetic texts related to this
subject that Islam attaches great importance to certain considerations of
which the devout must not lose sight, and whose omission would be the
natural consequence of this excess. As has come to be seen, not only must man
guard against excessive practice to the detriment of other duties (trade,
war ... ), but the pious act itself must not degenerate into an automatic
formula, where one no longer has a clear awareness of what one is doing, or
saying.83 The Prophet even observes that, forcing oneself to prolong the night
prayer may interfere with the sensory system, causing regrettable slips of the
tongue: instead of begging for God's forgiveness, one might utter blasphemies
or call down curses upon oneself.84 Without waiting to reach this point, a
simple bodily lethargy or mental satiety will be enough to allow oneself to rest
from these devout activities.85 The application of a pious action should last
only as long as it gives joy and cheerfulness to the heart, for we must not make
divine worship hateful to ourselves.86
One last remark, and not the least judicious, is that someone who weighs up
an action excessively is often led to find fault in that very action, or even
never to perform it again. The Prophet compares such a person to a severe
horse rider who continually tortures his mount, causing it die before he has
reached his destination.87 All these examples are not so much concerned with
removing an actual difficulty, as with preventing certain eventual difficulties that are
likely to happen. The solution offered does not change anything in the
structure of the action, but rather in its timing: it imposes a voluntary cessation
at the right moment. 
40 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
We now consider the second aspect. We are dealing here with a duty which
has been established in either normal circumstances, or in appropriate,
specific ones; since these conditions change, they put us in a situation where
performing our duty fully, as originally defined, becomes a real difficulty. Are
we still to perform it notwithstanding? Is God so indifferent to our suffering as
not to take into account the new situation? Certainly not, and this is where the
merciful characteristic of Qur'anic law appears most clearly. In effect, the
solution will consist of an adaptation of duty to the new conditions of life; the
action will undergo a considerable modification: this will be, according to
what circumstances require, a mutation, an attenuation, a postponement or even
an abrogation. Whether the change in the situation is definitive and permanent, or relative to a particular case, or to a particular category of people or
thing, the same considerations will apply to the action.
Let us take the example where the duty has been attenuated in a definitive
way. What is the numerical proportion in which Muslims who have been
invaded must put up an armed resistance against their enemy? One to ten.88
This is the first solution that the Qur'an gave to the first Muslim army, when
they numbered only a few hundred men. But, one curious thing is that the
nation grew more numerous, and it never returned to its original state, since
these young, eager people do not seem to have had the same energetic
qualities as before. This is explained as a kind of natural relaxation, due to the
great numbers of people who came to their aid and whose presence seemed to
exempt each member from making a personal effort. In such unavoidable
psychological conditions, how could such a community be obliged to attain
the same heroism as the one at the beginning? Nevertheless, with a moral
advantage through the faith that inspires him, the Muslim fighter will always
have a lead over his opponent and cannot lower himself to be his equal. From
this comes the second and final solution in which the ratio is now one to two.
In this example, the law concerning such a difficult case was revealed at a
later date. More often, it is given at the same time. Besides the normal case,
where one is in a position to act, the rule foresees an exceptional case for
which it gives an issue. Sometimes, it is a full dispensation. Thus, men who are
sick are exempted from their military duty.89 People who find themselves
oppressed in their country and who must search elsewhere for a secure place
to exercise their freedom of faith and religion, will be allowed to remain if
they cannot afford to go back.90 A traveller who cannot find wholesome,
permitted food can, and even must within limit, nourish himself with
anything available, rather than allow himself to starve to death.91
Sometimes it is a partial dispensation: On a journey, four-unit prayers are
reduced by hal.92 During battle, prayers may be performed walking or riding.93
Sometimes, it is a simple remission: Sick people and travellers do not have to
fast at the prescribed time; they can make up for it later.94 Sometimes, the
action which could not be performed is replaced by an easier one. A traveller
who cannot find water for his ablution, or a sick person unable to use it, can 
OBLIGATION 41
perform the action symbolically, which consists of touching a clean stone or
clean sand and then passing the hands over the face and arms. 95 It may be
observed that, in most of these examples, the text puts the emphasis on the
practical gentleness that they imply and which characterises the mercy of the
divine law. Thus they happen to have the necessary quality for demonstrating
that it is not something accidental, or a matter of chance, but an essential
principle, whose means of application is constantly sought.
Let us look at another aspect of this relationship between duty and
circumstance. In the aspects which we have studied up to now, the obstacle
before which the obligation made some concession was a natural one, not a
human creation. How about when, out of necessity, a mechanism has been set
up that man himself has created and that he is capable of dismantling? Cases
arise, nevertheless, where, in the long run, this device becomes like a
rebellious and stubborn second nature. Is one to shrink away from this
difficulty, treating it like a reality beyond man, for whose evolution one must
passively wait? The original solution of the Qur'anic legislation is entirely
different. It consists of approaching this situation and working it out with
particular skill, with a view to allowing man gradually to go back up the slope
which he descended, so that once he has reached a certain level, he will even
accept the moral order, up to now set aside.
A very striking example of this is found in the Qur'an's position with regard
to a bad habit that is continually transmitted from generation to generation
and deeply rooted in the nervous system and whole body of those who have
acquired it; we are speaking of this stupefaction, this scourge of humanity,
which is alcoholism. There are four passages in which one finds allusions to
the state of drunkenness and fermented (alcoholic) drinks. Only the fourth
and final one formally states the prohibition of these drinks. The first three
are only progressive stages to prepare the psychological ground for the
believers to accept this prohibition.
The first stage of this path was put into effect by a word revealed at Mecca,
a single word which hardly touches on the subject. Among the good gifts that
God has provided in nature, the Qur'an cites:
the fruit of the date-palm and of the grape-vine 16:67
and it immediately adds:
You derive both intoxicants and wholesome provision. 16:67
Only in understanding this parallelism, where alcohol is compared to other
produce which is qualified as good, without it being qualified as the same, do
the believers already have sufficient motive to feel some scruple with regard
to this drink.
Then, soon after their arrival in Medina, they are struck anew by a second 
42 THE MORAL WORWOFTHEQUR'AN
statement, which is meant to reinforce their scruples. It consists of a brief
comparison between the advantages and disadvantages of alcohol and games
of chance. From this comparison, the Qur'an concludes in these terms:
But the harm in them is greater than the benefit. 2:219
If it is true that nothing in this world is absolutely good or bad, that which is
called good or bad only contains a relatively high degree, then this conclusion
had to be taken as a veritable condemnation. It is only because the prohibition
was not clear enough in everyone's mind that a number of Muslims, perhaps
the majority, continued to drink whilst the others started from the beginning
of this era to abstain. It was necessary, therefore, for something more explicit
to bring everyone to a clear conviction. However, it was not without an effect
on those in the community who were unaware. As for the strong-minded, they
waited to receive a definitive decision confirming their point of view. In fact,
an injunction did come, but it was not definitive, forming only an intermediary stage. At this third stage, it was not said: 'Do not drink', but only:
Do not approach the prayer when you are drunk. 4:43
One will realise the progress made by this step if one considers that the prayer
in Islam constitutes not only the first religious duty to be performed regularly,
but also the external criterion, the sign that designates the true believer,
which must be performed five times a day, including four between midday and
night. This means that a person who drinks during these intervals risks
missing his most sacred duty. This partial and indirect interdiction was thus a
practical way of spacing out the periods of alcoholic dependency, whilst at the
same time reducing the sale of drinks, so as to clear them from the market
progressively, without causing an economic crisis through a complete and
sudden prohibition.
From there to a definitive prohibition and clearing the market once and for
all, there only remained one step, and it was taken by the fourth and last
formulation:
You who believe, intoxicants and gambling, idolatrous practices, and [divining
with] arrows are repugnant acts- Satan's doing: shun them so that you may
prosper. 5:90
This gentle and progressive approach reminds us of the way clever doctors
treat a chronic illness; or more generally of the way that mothers wean their
infants. Without any violence or harshness, the digestive system is led by
these means gradually to change its diet from light to more nourishing foods,
passing through all the intermediary stages. How infinitely more gentle than
medical skill or motherly tenderness does divine mercy appear! 
OBLIGATION 43

The progressive method we have just detailed is apparent not just in
particular examples, it is also applied in an equally clear manner throughout
the whole of Islamic ethics, as it is in the institution of Islam in general. We
know that the Qur'an, which plays a principal role in this institution, was not
sent down all at once and in the form that we see it today. On the contrary, it
appeared gradually over about twenty years in the form of fragments of
various lengths during two periods of roughly the same duration: the Meccan
period and the Medinan period. It can easily be seen that the passages
belonging to the first period are essentially concerned with establishing the
faith and the principles and general rules of behaviour; that, with the
exception of the rules regarding prayer and food, the application of these
practical rules for solving particular moral or legal problems was almost
completely reserved for the second period. From this point of view, one could
say that the whole of the Meccan period was a kind of preparation. The
particular applications of these general principles were so spread out, over a
period of ten years or so, that each new prescription constituted a progression
in the realm of obligation, relating to the previous stage and a point of
departure for the next stage. Setting aside the particular accompanying
circumstances, explaining and justifying the establishment of each new duty,
and considering this series of commandments, each separated by long
intervals, one can see that it is a pedagogical method of the highest value. It is
enough to imagine what would have happened if this entire multitude of
commands ruling every aspect of life had been delivered all at once and in a
sudden manner; spread out in this way, each soul was perfectly
accommodated, as if it gradually increased in strength and ability as it
practised obeying each new command.
The unbelievers living at the time of the Prophet failed to understand this
refined legislative wisdom. This is why they protested Why was the Qur'an not
sent down to him all at oncer6 And the same verse which mentions this objection
continues, providing us with the reply:
It is so that We can fortify your heart by it. 25:32
In another passage, we read a second explanation:
so you can recite it to mankind at intervals, and We have sent it down little by
~k ~~~
cA'isha very well understood the meaning of this. 97 cumar II, in tum,
underlined its importance in the political field. One day his son c Abd al-Malik
reproached him for being too patient: 'Why do you take so long in settling
your business?' cumar replied: 'My son, do not be too zealous; God twice 
44 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QUR' AN
warned against wine, and He only forbade it the third time. If I were to impose
the truth all at once, I fear people would only reject it all at once and this
would generate discord. '
98
C The delimitation and grading of duties
Thus, moral obligation in the Qur'an is given with a twofold condition: the
action to which it refers must be possible for ordinary human beings (subject
to the will of man) and approachable in the concrete reality of life (practical,
not tyrannical).
This is not all. Even if it does not leave the realm of moral good, it is not
enough for an action to be possible and practicable for it to be included under
the category of duty. Here we meet a hierarchy of values, both positive and
negative, cleverly arranged and richly detailed. In the first place, if we set
apart elementary and definite duties whose application is not debatable (such
as, not lying, returning what one has been entrusted to keep, helping anyone
in immediate danger), there remains creative, constructive virtue, a field of
activity which is so vast that it comprises endless degrees, all possible and practicable. Are we to perform them all, or is it enough to begin with something? In
other terms, are goodness and duty two co-extensive notions? Do there not exist,
beyond what is strictly obligatory, more and more meritorious degrees which
we can ignore without falling into immorality? If we consult individual
consciences, the diversity of responses certainly reveals opposing tendencies, as
not all human beings have the same requirements and moral energies. Whereas
strong souls99 place their duty at the highest possible degree of perfection and
thus equate these two concepts, the masses tend to remain at a low degree and
define duty according to a minimum of humanity and sociability.
Despite what he says, we hesitate to class Kant among the philosophers who
maintain the correlation between the idea of obligation and that of good, in
the broadest sense of that word. This is because, in order to place the notion of
duty above everything, he started by excluding all connections between man
and a superior being and inferior beings from his area of investigation, thus
limiting it to the individual and human society. Then, within these restricted
parameters, he further distinguished two categories of duties which he calls
perfect, or essential and imperfect, or accidental.10 Finally, the duties which he
includes in the latter category are precisely those whose aim is the perfection
of the self and the happiness of others; the duties he calls strict are nothing but
prohibitions: not to debase man, or to use him as a means to an end. The only
perfection he deems absolutely obligatory, and at the same time impossible in
this life, is that of moral intention, which consists in doing one's duty for
duty's sake only.
But to those who extend duty to all forms of good, and who also wish to
make the highest degree of perfection possible a rigorous obligation in every
domain, one may ask whether they consider all of these perfections a duty for
everyone, or whether they leave everyone the choice of the domain which he 
OBLIGATION 45
wishes to perfect. It is clear that, according to the first hypothesis, something
is demanded which is far beyond human ability, but, in the case of the second,
does it satisfy the moral need of man if he is monopolised by one value to
which he devotes himself entirely, to the detriment of the others?
The human being is a synthesis of relationships: the personal, familial,
social, human and divine; a system of elements that are interdependent and
closely linked; all liable to evolution and progress, so that none can be
neglected without damaging, deforming or mutilating the 'admirable
proportion' in which man is created. The moral sense demands the
progression of this ensemble altogether, which is only possible on condition
that all parts are raised together to a certain level. The human soul must partake
in all values, before it specialises in one of them more specifically. This is the Islamic
view of duty. 101
From this co-ordination of values, it necessarily results that in each branch
of life, duty must occupy only a certain part of the good which is both possible
and practicable for this very branch, and leave space for others to satisfy their
own demands and obtain their legitimate share of our endeavours. This is a
criterion whose upper limit can be ascertained by balanced minds, and of
which each virtue ceases to be itself if it violates another virtue.
However, this upper limit, which varies according to the intelligence and
conditions of every being, only partially and negatively defines the field of
moral good. Everyone recognises various degrees of merit in this vast field.
Failing at one level or another leads to either severe condemnation, or light
reproof; occasionally it arouses no reaction from the conscience at all. Does this
not tacitly acknowledge that there must be two different values in the realm
of good: a compulsory minimum and a more meritorious supplement?
Consciences are not mistaken in that, but in wishing to consider the obligatory
as the lowest possible level, a criterion in which people generally do not find
their satisfaction. The upright man requires more. He vaguely conceives of an
average of goodness, which cannot be measured precisely. How are we to
define this average for every one of our duties? The human mind cannot
provide a rational and objective criterion. Should we refer to the individual
conscience? Then there would be no agreement on anything. Should we work
together to establish a conventional limit? This would mean resorting to
arbitrary opinion. Yet we need such definitions. for the law to be universal, it is
necessary to have a certain homogeneous basis; otherwise, no rule would remain
and the law would only be a meaningless word. Various attempts have been
made rationally to define our strict duty towards our fellow human beings, but
these have only been able to give the negative aspect, which is not to wrong
others. Men thus are entitled to our justice, but not to our charity. Here,
selfishness is established in law! And how are we to measure the minimum
necessary of our duties towards God and ourselves? Islamic ethics offers
precious insights on all these points.
Aside from the absolute duty that carries no restriction or limitation, 
namely, the act of faith, it indicates two levels of good for each possible action
and it names them quite distinctively and precisely: the 'quantum minima'
below which one cannot go without neglecting one's duty, or above without
exceeding the maximum; in other words, the obligatory good and the
recommended good. Already that which it designates as strictly necessary
represents a substantial participation in each merit. 102 Besides that, in each
domain the Qur'an opens the way to an ever greater participation and
encourages everyone not to stop at this ordinary level, but always to rise to
even higher degrees of merit. 103 Above the established right it places the virtue
of tolerance and insists above all on 'generosity'.104 If a debtor cannot pay back
the debt, it is a duty to allow him more time; but it is more praiseworthy to
allow him not to repay at all.105 It is a right to resist injustice but to endure and
forgive:
is one of the most magnanimous things 42:41-3
To perform one's duty well is good enough but:
If anyone does good spontaneously, Allah is Responsive, All-Knowing. 2:157
Parallel to the degrees of positive value which one comes to discern in the
Qur'anic concept of moral good, it is easy to recognise those negative values,
which the Qur'an places opposite. However, with these two parallel columns
the scale of values is still not exhausted, even at its basic level. The two
opposites are brought closer together by a medium term, which links them
without giving a solution of continuity. Between the value and the anti-value,
the Qur'an places the non-value; between the prescribed and the proscribed,
there is the non-proscribed. Similarly, in the acts which are prescribed it
distinguishes firstly the primary duty, then other obligations, then finally more
and more meritorious actions, and in those which are proscribed it ranks the
unforgivable, then other bad actions, serious or venial, just as it establishes two
degrees in the non-proscribed acts: the permissible and the tolerated. One is
entitled to ask if anything can be added by the most sensitive and refined
mind to such a hierarchy of values? It is in vain that we try to find some
lacuna that might be likely to justify the appellation 'separatist mind',
coined by L. Gauthier to describe the Islamic mind, which had established
this hierarchy, acknowledged by the author as something purely Muslim:
'The juxtaposition of opposites is the formula in which everything is
summarised in the Arab world, especially Muslim Arab world: religion,
history, and so on.' 106
That said, let us now resume our exposition at the point where we left off,
to say a word on the true meaning of this gradation, which concerns Qur'anic
allowances and permissions. Needless to say, permission in the proper sense of
the word only refers to actions which are morally neutraU07 As for the 
OBLIGATION 47
allowances, one must first discard the idea of making a concession to
something that relaxes mores, or to someone's passions and caprices. Before
anything, this would be a negation of ethics itself, which by definition is a rule
of conduct. What is it to obey a rule, if not to hold to it firmly and not to give in
to temptations to turn away from it? That is given. If there is a kind of
difficulty towards which the Qur'an shows itself to be inflexible and which it
encourages us to conquer at any price, it is precisely that which implies
resisting our inclinations. One has to choose between obedience to God and
submission to our own unbridled desires:
Do not follow your own desires, letting them misguide you from the way of Allah 38:25
Do not follow your own desires, and deviate from the truth. 4:135
Who could be further astray than someone who follows his whims and desires? 28:50
Thus, in the allowances made by the Qur'an, it is not a matter of inclining
towards our whims. It is purely and simply a matter of taking into
consideration the concrete reality to which we apply our activity, not that one
goes down this path to the point of abandoning our effort and dispensing with
our duty. We have seen that, in general, it is not in itself that the rule is
subordinate to the situation, but in its spatio-temporal determinations:
quantity, duration, form, date, and so on. If one does not wish for the moral
law to become a dead letter, it must not be enclosed within a rigid framework
of times, places and entirely external conditions; it must be applicable either
in one form or another. It is only natural and just that the effectiveness of this
application demands some adaptability to real conditions which are beyond
our control. When, at the extreme limit, faced with the insurmountable
obstacle of this reality, obligation gives way to necessity (such as in the case of
an incapacitated man who cannot perform his military duty, or a deprived and
starving person who can only find impure food), it is essentially a matter of
preventing complete exhaustion from one single practice to the detriment of
others of equal or more importance. The aim of the gentleness of this legislation is
therefore not to diminish, but to rationalise effort. We shall see below108 how the
Qur'an has formed a synthesis of these two notions, but let us first clarify the
Qur'anic position with regard to problems pertaining to the very concept of
obligation.
3 Antinomies of obligation
With the notion of obligation, we are, in effect, at the crossroads of a
multitude of practical antinomies, from among which all moral thought is
extracted and with regard to which it must take a particular position. We draw
attention to two principal antinomies below. 
48 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
1) Unity and diversity
It is an indisputable fact that, if ethics is a science, it must be constructed not
from specific and contingent propositions, but from laws which are both
universal and necessary. None the less, if it is also a normative science,
designed to govern human action, then it must consider life in its concrete
reality. Life is essentially diversity, change and renewal. We are thus drawn to
the following alternatives: either the model of behaviour which this science
presents is considered to be immutable and universal, or it is open to
variations and modifications. According to the first hypothesis, humanity is
taken back to a single type that is perpetually identical to itself; space is then
reduced to a point, time to an instant, the movement of the universe stops and
life itself is removed and replaced by an abstract idea, which exists only in the
imagination of the moralist. If, however, one takes into account the
irreducible, inalienable characteristic of the singular action, which is subject
to the alteration of time and the disparity of space, we can no longer talk of a
rule, a law or a science. For what is a rule that is destined to die as soon as it is
created; a law which only commands an individual for one instant; a science
without any universality?
So, to safeguard the unity of the law or to respect the diversity of the nature
ruled by this law; to maintain the simplicity of the rule or to subordinate it to
the complexity of the life to which it is applied; to rise to a pure and eternal
ideal, or to descend to an ever-changing reality; to make the essence prevail,
or existence? These are the extremes against which we must guard. We cannot
approach one to any extent without distancing ourselves from the other. This
is the first ethical difficulty.
2) Authority and liberty
However, there is another problem, which, moreover, is linked to the first. It is
beyond question that the relationship expressed in the word obligation is one
which puts two different wills together, and is even conveyed by their very
natures, manifesting antagonistic tendencies: the legislator who commands,
jealous of his authority, and the subject who acts, defending his freedom. The
legislator's authority is all the more respected if the rules which it establishes
keep their statements intact and so fixed that circumstantial variations do not
interfere at all in order to limit or attenuate them. In such conditions, moral
law becomes similar to natural law; the subject only submits to it passively
and applies it blindly, so that the necessary response to pure obligation is
worthless freedom and servile submission. Then what good is this conscience,
if its presence or absence does not change anything in the course of things? If
one satisfies the active subject, granting him complete freedom of action, the
opposite effect will be produced: a command will be transformed into a simple
piece of advice, which we can accept or ignore, according to our personal
opinion.
Faced with these contradictory demands are we to choose one, or to try to 
OBLIGATION 49
compromise? Which one to take? Which conciliation to make? This is the
problem that must be resolved. We will now see how it has been solved in
various ways. In the following lines and up to the end of the chapter, we
propose to demonstrate how the Qur'anic solution can be considered as an
impartial conciliation to all parties concerned, whereas ordinary doctrines
have varying tendencies to opt only for one or the other of the two opposing
terms. We will reserve the first of these two assertions for the latter
paragraph, which will be assigned to the conclusion and proceed with the
second, underlining the difficulties encountered by two current theories
which are typical of two extreme views, one representing the intransigent
authority of universal duty, the other defending the originality of
psychological factors over the invariability of logic: the theories of Kant and
Rauh.
Kant
It is known that, in order to resist certain doctrines which had softened ethics
too much, accommodating them to the demands of worldly life, the German
philosopher was not content to trace a line of demarcation between morality
and feelings. He went further - too far. According to him, the concept of duty
is not only isolated from any experience of the senses or concrete reality to
which it may be applied, but it is also purged of its own characteristic, of the
constitutive content of any particular rule, in order to conserve only its formal
characteristic, that of being a universal law, valid for everyone. It is from this
that he takes his definition of duty: any action whose rule can be made
universal without becoming absurd. From such an abstract formula, Kant
thought he could deduce a 'deontology' of ethics, to use Bentham's words; that
is, a science of concrete duties, which specifies for each duty whether it is
moral or immoral, just by considering whether or not it can be made
universal. Is such an undertaking achievable? Is the very foundation of this
construction solid enough to support it? Here, from the point of view with
which we are concerned, is Kantian thought. It may be said that, overall, it
constitutes three stages in its elaboration:
a) the establishment of the initial act;
b) an analysis allowing an ascent to the most general principle;
c) descending again to set out the fundamental rules for human ethics.
a) The starting point of the Kantian doctrine consists of the concrete act
that is supplied by the immediate conscience, which is to say that, in our
moral judgements, we evaluate actions not in virtue of their results, be they
pleasant or unpleasant, but in relation to the idea of a general rule, applicable
to all subjects and independent of any consequences. This fact is undeniable.
Far from establishing the pursuit of pleasure and the avoidance of suffering as
a principle of moral evaluation, we value virtuous actions according to their 
cost to ourselves. We praise to the highest degree the strength of character of
those who know how to resist all temptations and how to overcome all
obstacles. Far from giving ourselves the right to subordinate the rule of our
own behaviour to our ephemeral, subjective moods, we acknowledge that we
must measure it by that which we demand of others. 'Whatever you wish
people to do for you, do the same for them.' This is what the Holy Scriptures
enjoin us to do.109 And the Qur'an insists:
Do not give away the bad things that you yourself would only accept with your
eyes closed. 2:267
The Prophet of Islam goes so far as to make this egalitarian love the very
condition of faith. 'Nobody can call himself a believer if he does not like for his
brother that which he likes for himself.' 11 From this unanimous condemnation of selfishness in all its forms, the conscience of the ordinary person has
already taken the principle of the universality and reciprocity of duty.
Thus, from the beginning, Kant only took note of this law, establishing it as
an act of the conscience. Although he himself has shown how such antique
statements are insufficient for providing a full ethical system,111 it is, however,
the idea they inspired that nevertheless constitutes his entire system. Indeed,
he refers to the judgement of 'the most ordinary mind' in order to establish
his essential rule of judgement - subject to the laws of practical pure reason, a
rule which he formulates as follows: 'Ask yourself that if the action that you
intend to do happens according to a natural law of which you make yourself a
part, do you still consider it possible for you to will it?' 'For instance,' he
continues, 'everyone knows very well that if one person were to permit
himself to cheat in secret, that would be no reason for everyone else to do the
same; that if he were to be completely indifferent to the misery of others, it
would not mean that everyone should feel the same towards him.'112
b) Where does this implacable demand for an ideal action which is not
modelled on any experience come from? The founder of practical formalism
explains that it arises because moral law transports us in an ideal fashion to a
sphere which is completely different from that of empirical law. It allows us to
participate in a pure, intelligible world, wherein the autonomy of the will
consists not only in its being independent of the natural law of the senses,
which is only a negative aspect of freedom, but also in the fact that the will
gives itself its own law. This law must be that of pure reason, which is not only
free of every empirical condition, every intuition and every substance, but
also capable of determining the will a priori; for pure reason is so constituted
that, in its practical as well as in its theoretical usage, it is 'one and the same
reason which judges according to a priori principles'.113 Now, there is nothing
but the pure form of universal legislation which is capable of determining the
will a priori. This is why every pronouncement must adapt itself to this form,
at the risk of being morally impossible. 
OBLIGATION 51
Therefore, not only is this universality similar to that of natural law, by
which an ordinary judgement must guide itself like a principle that is typical
of pure reason, but it is an absolute universality applicable to all reasonable
beings, finite and infinite, with its foundation upon an apodictic judgement,
that is to say necessary and a priori, of pure reason. Kant states this fundamental law of pure practical reason thus: 'Act in such a way that the principle
determining your will can also be valued as a principle of universal
legislation.'114 Even this still has the appearance of the 'trivial' reason which
Kant wished to transcend.
c) Once the pinnacle of abstraction has been reached, with the most general
formulation imaginable, we may excuse ourselves from describing the slope
down which one must descend in order to discover how this general law
applies to human nature.
Let us now make this journey again in its three successive stages in order to
examine its merits.
a) First we ask if there really exists a necessary connection between
universality and morality? Is it true that the necessary and sufficient condition
for attributing a moral characteristic to a rule is that it should have the
potential to become a universal law? Is it also true that 'if a rule does not
generally withstand the test of the form of a natural law, it is morally
impossible'?115 If one is to believe our author, this double criterion contains
'the canon which allows us to evaluate our actions in general'116 and the means
of self-instruction which is 'the quickest, since it is infallible'.117 'With this pair
of compasses in hand, one has, in every case that arises, all the means
necessary to distinguish between that which is good and that which is bad,
that which conforms to and that which is contrary to duty.'118 It does not
require too much discernment to see how much the first part of this criterion
brings extremely diverse values together within the same concept, from duty
to that which is completely the opposite, including actions which are either
neutral or doubtful. Indeed, with the exception of certain kinds of behaviour
which man would not find acceptable if done in return to him, everything else
must seem to him to constitute faultless behaviour, whose rules can be
converted into a universal law, commencing with the rule that the decent man
makes for himself as a part of his daily life: to follow his innocent inclinations,
which is to say those whose satisfaction is clearly permissible. In this way, the
act which is morally good and the act which is neutral become indistinguishable within the concept of 'a possible universal law', and duty is
brought down to the level of that which is simply allowed, because it is one
thing to say that a law must be made universal, but another to say that a law
can be so. The Kantian formulation, like the 'vulgar' statement to which it
appeals, is incapable of providing the difference between an obligatory act and
one that is not forbidden. However, it is known with what care Kant distinguished two categories of rules concerning duty (for instance, doing good to
others): one which merely commands conformity to duty (for whatever 
reason: a kind personality, vanity or self-interest), and one which also
demands that it be determined by the idea of duty. Now it is clear that the
criterion of 'possible', even 'necessary', universality does not take into account
such an extremely important distinction, which leads to a second confusion:
between morality and legality. The most unfortunate confusion is that which
his so-called 'touchstone' may introduce in the individual conscience, by
granting it the right to declare any action morally good which it willingly elevates to
the universal, even if it were the most reprehensible, either according to
common wisdom or at least according to Kantian wisdom itself. If we examine
the feelings of those who make fairly serious derogations to moral law (such as
a doctor who lies to a patient in order to bring him back to health, a
philanthropist who tells a white lie to save a life, or the sensitive man who
prefers to commit suicide rather than to live with dishonour), do they not give
their rules the value of a universal law, before they are applied to anyone
placed in the same conditions as themselves? Well! Would a cynic who
indulges in the basest debauchery find any objection if everybody followed his
example? Are there not others who would establish nudism and all its immoral
consequences as a universal law?
Conversely, it is the rules which cannot be elevated to the universal
without contradicting themselves, or compromising human nature, which
nevertheless we cannot accuse of immorality. Suppose a man makes it a rule
to attain a stage of moral perfection that nobody has reached before. Not only
would such an idea be completely destroyed if it were universalised, but also if
it were even just slightly extended, for then a higher stage would no longer be
a higher stage. Is this a reason for qualifying the rule as immoral? Here is
another example: someone who is celibate. Let one whole generation enforce
the obligation not to marry and the last living person of this generation will
inevitably spell the end of humanity. Can one declare the rule of celibacy, so
praised in Christianity, to be a crime? What would Kant himself have thought?
The parallelism of the universal and the moral is broken, both in its positive
and negative aspects. However, it does remain true, at least, that there exists a
certain necessary relationship between the obligatory and the universal, a
unilateral relation, the meaning and import of which we shall explain later.
b) Kant does not limit himself to establishing the universality of our duties
as a concrete, empirical and contingent fact. Nor is he content with a semiabstraction that makes human reason a faculty of the universal. Rather, he
goes still higher, to capture the very essence of practical reason itself and he
presents this fundamental law of pure reason as an inflexible necessity, not of
any particular rule 'determined for certain actions', but of a universal law in
general.119 He asserts that moral law must be in the form of a law in general, in
the most abstract universality, and not in any other form, if duty is not to be a
'chimerical concept'. Kant states that he was not led to his formalism by any
philosophical need for abstraction or by any imitation of Aristotle's logical
formalism, but by moral considerations of the highest importance, by the very 
OBLIGATION 53
logic of morality, because, he says, if the moral value of the action does not
reside in the results expected, or in its affinity with our inclinations, but in its
relationship with the law; and if elsewhere this law is an a priori fact of reason,
of this faculty which is autonomous and independent of the faculty of the
senses, one must set aside both empiricism, which sees good consisting in
useful consequences, and mysticism, which wanders in the transcendent, and
keep to rationalism, which alone is appropriate for moral concepts.120 We can
agree with him so far. Now, he adds, since I have deprived the will of all
impulses and results, there only remains universal conformity with the law in
general,121 which alone must serve as the guiding principle. In other words, if
matter, which is the object of the will, were a determining principle, the will
would be subject to an empirical condition, 'whereas, by removing all matter
through the process of abstraction, only form remains'. 122
In our opinion, here lies the equivocation and lack of rigour by which this
argument has left a gap between the premises and the conclusion; for, when
one has removed impulses from the senses, and other pragmatic considerations, one has not exhausted all the possible ways to reach pure form. Can
there not be seen a middle ground between the matter rejected and the form that has
been chosen? It is neither matter as 'object of desire', subordinated to personal
experience, which is variable for everyone, nor form, which is entirely empty
and devoid of all content; instead, it is a thinkable concept, an object of
understanding, acknowledged a priori, imposing itself upon everyone through
the representation of its intrinsic value. Would this not have escaped the evils
of empiricism while preventing itself from becoming lost in formalism?
By a sort of logical need, it is true, we impose a universal form on all our
rules, in order to make them pass for moral laws. We cannot accept that an
action should be obligatory for some and not for others placed in similar
circumstances. It offends reason; but this necessary link between matter and
form is only one aspect: every duty is universaL but the opposite is not true. This is
because, in order to establish this relationship, moral judgement begins by
perceiving within the action a value in itself which through its internal logic
tends to expand; a value of a particular nature, both practicable and accessible
to all individuals. Any way of behaving which does not fulfil this dual
condition cannot be a moral law. It is what it is, except for a duty; but it is not
necessarily a crime; it may be an optional action (such as celibacy), or the most
meritorious action (the sublime heroism of a superman). Just because divine
virtue is the highest moral value that does not mean that it is a universal law
for all reasonable beings. If this is so -that is to say, if not all values have the
ability to take the form of a universal law, and we have to choose from among
them the one whose very nature demands this universality - all the more
reason that the only logical possibility for any rule to fit this abstract formula
is far from providing us with the criterion of moral good. The consideration of
a law's universality hardly precludes any consideration of its legitimacy. Now we
maintain that, if, in order to decide whether a rule is legitimate, one were 
54 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QUR' AN
content to consider the pure idea of law in general, without examining its
content and meaning, it would be impossible to establish that one practice
were moral and another were not, the virtue any more than the vice. Kant
acknowledges that something which can be used for good or evil is not good
absolutely. Is this not very much the case with formalism? The universal form
is only a mould in which one can bake either a cake or a brick.
The great paradox of the Kantian doctrine is that it holds something which
is only derivative as a principal characteristic. For Kant, it is the formal law
which is the foundation of good, rather than good which serves as its
foundation. This position, which is the opposite of that of the Qur'an, as we
have seen, is determined in Kant's thought by the very same paralogism which
we have just rejected. 'If the concept of good is not derived from an anterior
law', he tells us, 'but serves as its foundation, then it can only be the concept
of something to be desired.'123 We believe that, on the contrary, it is not
because a law is universal that it can be judged as moral. It is because it is
established as just that it must be universalised. Why do we seek universal
peace, if it is not because we think that it is necessary for the happy
development, for the very existence, of humanity? Suppose, instead, that the
weakest must disappear in order to leave space for the fittest: our rule will
change instantly, and then the only advice that a moralist should give us is to
engage in universal war. Universality only translates in extensive terms that
which is first given in the form of a comprehensive essence. In the moral
order, as in the order of logic, necessity is the justification for universality,
which must, therefore, precede it in the jurist's mind; and moral necessity
proceeds from an internal value, not from an external form.
This reversed conception of the relationship between virtue and the law is
merely the transposition onto a metaphysical plane of the doctrine of
theological voluntarism, according to which God does not command something because it is intrinsically just; that which He ordains is just only because
He has ordained it. It is only a change in vocabulary. Where theologians say:
God's supreme command, Kant says: the categorical imperative of pure reason.
There is this difference, however: the theologians who support this view have
a guarantee in divine perfection against unjust commands. What guarantee do
we have with this abstract concept of transcendental reason, unless it is
identified with divine reason?
Do not mistake our thinking. We do discern several aspects within Kantian
formalism, since the law of pure reason serves many uses: it is both an
objective principle which determines an action and its objects (both good and
evil), and a subjective principle (a motivation) which compels the will to
obey.124 We have no difficulty with this last point; on the contrary, we
acknowledge that the pure form of the law is perfectly capable of acting on
moral conscience. To perform one's duty because it is a duty, without being
concerned about the moral good at which it aims: such is the definition of an absolutely
devoted will. We shall show later125 that this is the ideal of Qur'anic ethics. You 
OBLIGATION 55
do not ask the doctor whom you trust why he prescribes what he does; any
discussion here would be akin to suspicion. Is it the same when it is a matter,
not of acting but of judging, evaluating, or prescribing? Can the external form of a
law in general act as a principle oflegislation on good and evil? To say that the
sole idea of a universal obligation is enough to inform us exactly about the
best ways of behaving - this is beyond us. A reason which commands us to
obey a law is arbitrary and tyrannical. It is not reasonable if it does not
presuppose perfect harmony between that law and the ideal of justice. Kant
has thus confused and treated in the same way two very separate aspects of
moral conscience: 1. the moment where it is still a matter of instituting the law; 2.
that where it concerns the execution of a law that is already established. In other
words, obligation and intention, ethics and morality.
c) Universal duty! We agree with it; but we still have to distinguish
several different degrees of universality. There are as many concepts as
there is extension: paternal, maternal, marital and filial duty; the duties of a
leader, a friend, a citizen, a person; the duty to act, the duty to think, the
duty to love. Can one legitimately grant all these terms the same influence
over every subject and every object, in such a way as to make them drop
their respective barriers and overlap one another? Are we authorised to tell
a leader to treat his superiors in the same way as his subordinates, or a
husband to treat every woman in the world as his own wife, and vice versa?
Beyond its limits, every duty ceases to be a duty and may even become a
crime. Thus, it always concerns a relative universal, the extension of which
can only be defined by the function of the nature of its constitutive elements
and from the entire range of appropriate conditions. Dividing duties and
defining them is the essential work of a proper moralist. The question is how
to proceed. Starting from the absolute can one arrive at the relative without
any extraneous borrowing? How can one determine - with the outline of a
picture - the colours and all the details that the artist puts in? How can a
pure grammarian explain the meaning of the essence of a discourse and the
nuances of style? To want to turn ethics into mathematics, into even more
than mathematics - what a paradox! It is impossible to deduce all geometrical theorems from a single principle; how can one succeed any better
in the science of behaviour?
Thus, for lack of a rigorous deduction, which is impossible in this case;
rather, with Kant, we witness quite an ingenious reconciliation between form
and matter, a kind of adaptation whose aim is to justify, on the one hand, the
same rules of common morality, having detached them from their religious or
metaphysical roots, and on the other, certain personal views which he adopts
on the subject of the virtuous life. We do not dispute that sincere consciences
can come together, in the Kantian manner, to examine the moral ideal. If,
however, we examine some of these derivative rules in their relationship with
his prime principle, they appear to us either to be devoid of a necessary link, or
in poor agreement with it. 
56 THE MORAL WORLD OF THE QUR' AN
Devoid of a necessary link: this is the rule which prescribes respect for
humanity, for others as for ourselves, treating the human being as an end in
himself. One may ask why pure reason, absolute and autonomous mistress as
she is, feels this necessity to respect something other than herself. Is it
reasonable to consider as an end that which is only partially so: this mixed
nature, made of matter and spirit, more fundamentally sensual than rational?
This point does not seem to have entirely escaped the Kantian mind; and it is
probably why he restricted his rule to demanding that the human being be
treated, not uniquely, but 'at the same time' as an end. Unfortunately, this
intellectual rigour did not slacken until he came to the definition of practical
duty, in this respect. The logic of the duality of human nature would have had
to establish a distinction not only between being a person and an individual,
between that which we have in common and that which belongs to each
human being, but also between the rights of reason and the needs of the body.
Kant agrees with everyone else that human beings have the right to personal
safety, and the strict duty not to violate someone else's body, or their
possessions; he forbids slavery and servitude in all its forms. The effort of
refining his thinking was not made in order to utter banalities which are too
great to fit his principle. Can there not be seen here something more in the
conclusion than in the premises? If respect can and must extend to man's
sensible element, why deny it to him in other aspects? Why is it permitted to
treat animals as objects, domesticating them and killing them without
scruple? Other considerations that are irrelevant to pure logic must without
doubt have been present in Kant's mind for him to have integrated this
unbalanced process into his conclusions, sometimes in order to expand them,
or sometimes to restrict them.
In poor agreement with the principle, such as when he forbids us to allow
anyone to encroach upon our rights. Either the words have lost their meaning,
or a right such as it is does not constitute a duty towards the one who possesses
it, but towards others. If it is truly my right, then I am free to insist on it or to
delegate it to whomsoever I wish. of course, through a kind of division of the
self, as an individual subject, I have to defend my right insofar as I am a human
being, insofar as I am the trustee of this sacred principle of humanity, but
besides the duty of justice, there is that of charity. Should it not also be
applied universally? Charity implies, with all the more reason, forgiveness and
tolerance; on that account, in commanding us to love our enemies, Christian
ethics was much more faithful to the principle of universal duty than Kantian
ethics.
We witness here a tacit acknowledgement that universality cannot be
granted to one duty without destroying that of an opposing duty. Actually, the
unconditional, categorical imperative cannot be conceived strictly according
to the word, which is to say in an absolute fashion, unlimited either by
experience or by understanding, unless it is accepted as a unique duty. Since
there is, and there must be, a plurality of duties, two cases are possible: either 
OBLIGATION 57
both imperatives will agree, without violating each other, or each one can
extend not only to neutralise, but also to oppose the other.
In the first case, there is no practical difficulty. For instance, we must not
lie and we must not kill: two duties which are perfectly compatible and can
always go together. Certainly, it is not necessary that they are always imposed
simultaneously, one concerning words, the other concerning deeds; but the
limits assigned to each of them are not imposed upon them from the outside,
but by their very content and the analysis of their own particular concepts, a
task which is suitable for the exercise of human understanding, independently
of any empirical element. It is in the case of conflicting duties that the most
serious difficulties arise. Here are some examples: we have to tell the truth
and be polite towards others; what are we to do when speaking the hard truth
would be hurtful? I must keep my word, but what happens if I discover that
the help I had promised would be given at the expense of a blatant injustice? I
must not lie and it is also forbidden for me to abandon a soul I could save;
what am I to do when the truth exposes a third person who is innocent? If I
tell the truth in such a case, at the cost of someone's life, is it a praiseworthy,
honourable action, or one of blameworthy selfishness? If I permit myself to lie
in order to save a human life, do I have contempt for myself or do I sacrifice
myself? If I attempt a compromise by using an equivocal expression, do I
promote virtue, or, on the contrary, compromise it, since I would intend to
allow the aggressor to believe the wrong meaning, and thus while avoiding the
letter of the lie, I would keep to its spirit.
The situation can clearly be seen. Here, a generalisation of two imperatives,
even if it is conceptual, inevitably leads to their mutual infringement, contradiction and annihilation. From this comes the absolute necessity of narrowing
the field of application for one of them, in order to allow space for the other.
But which one? Are we allowed to privilege one over the other, arbitrarily?
How do we confer upon them the equal right to existence without beginning
to grant them equal value? Now, it is not unacceptable to give equal status to
the indispensable, the necessary and the superfluous, or to what is the most
urgent and the least, or existence and perfection. The task of the moralist does
not come to an end when he has drawn up a list of duties; he still has to
establish a hierarchy of values. And even supposing this order is established, it
will never remain definitive, since it is essentially relative; because that which
is indispensable in one case may become secondary in another, or even
superfluous in a third. Thus, when danger threatens, the most precious goods
are sacrificed to save a life, but life is sacrificed to save honour.
It is in connection with actual reality that the value most worthy to be
chosen is defined; it is in nature that one can trace with precision a line of
demarcation between different duties, a line which is unstable and always
subject to modification. In this way, in order to determine the duty of a given
moment, the last word will be reserved for each person's own judgement,
maybe even to what is called their sixth sense. 
58 THE MORAL WORLDOFTHEQUR'AN
We now see how the Kantian doctrine is left behind on two counts, and
with that we are transported to the other side of the argument.
Rauh
With regard to the opposite extremes to the Kantian doctrine, which
attributes all legislative power to transcendental reason, other doctrines have
upheld the cause of the freedom of the empirical self. This opposition finds its
most striking, indeed its most repulsive expression, in Guyau or Nietzsche,
who have respectively reduced morality to a feeling for beauty or a living will.
From this latter point of view, moral value does not exist already in the order
of eternal things; it is a human creation through which man goes beyond
himself to become the superman.
Without pushing this revolutionary idea to its limit, which tends to remove
completely the idea of obligation and with that, ethics itself; and whilst
acknowledging the transcendence of the idea of duty in relation to the
individual, the French philosopher, Frederic Rauh, meanwhile posited that
each individual was the author of their own rules. 126 One can say, without fear
of being paradoxical, that, despite the distance that separates them, this
thought meets - even coincides in a certain measure - with that of Kant. They
only retain the notion of duty in a general sense, which does not include
particular commands. However, after this coinciding starting point, the two
views immediately begin to diverge. Whereas the German philosopher glides
through the sky of logic, only gradually descending towards concrete reality,
and even then with great reserve, the author of Experience morale rushes
hurriedly towards the psychological realm. We have seen how, departing from
the idea that it is the essence of any good which is of value for all wills, Kant
had tried to create commands from this abstract principle that were less
abstract, and from these a few rules that were still more concrete. Having discovered these commands, he encapsulated them forever within a rigid and
immobile framework, isolated from each other, like Leibnitzian monads. The
problem of conflicting duties never arose for him, since everything passed
before his eyes as if each action had to be determined by one and only one rule.
Rauh was more correct when he declared that no abstract rule is able to
rule concrete reality by itself, in the same way that it is impossible to
determine a point on a map without referring to several other points, or to
explain a word in a text without taking the context into account; in the same
way that the art of medicine cannot guarantee the efficacy of a medicine
without taking into account the sick person's state and the course of the
illness; or in the same way that the moralist cannot remove human
behaviour which is essentially spatio-temporal from the effects of space and
time. Our action is a real creation which is destined to take place in the real
world. Therefore, it is not enough for it to be logically possible; it must be
practically demonstrable; it must find its place amid the facts which
surround it, in such a way that it is neither hindered by the events which 
OBLIGATION 59
precede it, nor negated by those which follow it. Thus, before we make any
decision, we have no option but to inform ourselves of its objective reality,
not only in the course of its present development but also in its history and
its future. And that is not all: it is also necessary to take into account, at the
same time, the diversity of mental factors which determine our reaction to
nature. In multiplying one series of factors by the other, the result which we
obtain for each new case is always an original product. Add the
irreversibility of time and you come to the unequivocal conclusion that two
moments in history can never be identical. This demonstrates the relative
character of the ethical life.
However, our philosopher, who knew how to avoid the Kantian error, was
not able to prevent himself from falling into the reverse trap. According to his
way of teaching ethics, everything happens as if the dissimilarity of two
moments in life excluded their resemblance and did not allow anything in
common between them; as if, besides the individual element, there was no
place for a generic element; as if, behind everything that happens, nothing
was nothing enduring. This is why he invites us to concentrate our attention
on the temporary; he overtly encourages us to free ourselves from principles
and ideals. Instead of submitting to them, we should ceaselessly put them to
the test.127 Hence, not only must everyone legislate on his own duty according
to his temperament, vocation and aspirations, but each person must
constantly call his own rules into question, at every moment demolishing
whatever they have only just built the previous moment. Do we not risk
caprice and arbitrariness when we abandon ourselves to such an anarchic life?
But this is not the most important point: we must question ourselves about the
very principle that experience has the power to guide the conscience.
Experience prefers facts, whereas conscience feeds on values. By what sort of
magical operation can we turn facts into values? Rauh himself acknowledges
that a value judgement can never be made from a simple judgement of reality,
no matter in what form this reality is presented, whether objective or
subjective, simple or complex, in the past, present or future.
Concerning the past and present, all that we can gather from our
experimental inquiry can be summed up in the simple observation that a
particular act has always been followed by a particular result. We record the
fact, we take action upon it, nothing else. No doubt, when we judge whether
the effect was good or evil, we are inclined, even well-placed to judge the
same about the action which has caused it. But what actually enables us to
judge the effect? If our experience results in an appreciative judgement, if it
'emerges', then it is not the origin of this judgement, but only the circumstance. Its having happened does not mean that it should please or displease
us. Even if there is a natural relationship between the two judgements it is
still necessary to make an important distinction here: our estimative
judgement itself is an assessable reality, a mental fact which arises out of
experience, since it falls within the category of internal observation. 
60 THE MORAL WORW OF THE QuR'AN
However, the object of this judgement is a value, which by definition escapes
any experience and is infinitely beyond it. Experience only attempts to
approach it step by step, with the strange feeling that it is both recognisable
and indefinable. Value belongs to the order of the absolute; it is not
inscribed in the temporal, even if the latter seems to suggest it. It is not
there, then, that we decipher it.
The part played by experience is even smaller with regard to the future,
which is the only domain of the moral act (not being of the order of that which
is, but of that which must be, since it is impossible to decide to do something
in the past, or even at the very moment where a decision is being made).
Firstly, it is hardly worth recalling that it is not experience as such which
entitles me to conclude that, if things have happened in a certain way up to
now, they will happen tomorrow and for always in the same way. This
induction is logically based upon our belief in the stability of nature. Such is
the case too with the law of high numbers, which must postulate the nonintervention of new causes likely to disrupt the average rate of our calculations. Finally, with all my experimental knowledge and its appertaining
postulates, what do I achieve? I learn of the practical possibility (or impossibility) of achieving an objective, or of the degree of probability of success.
What will tell me if that which I plan is worthy of my research? And when
faced with several possibilities, what is going to make me decide to select a
particular one from among them, which might be the least favoured by human
nature? It is all too obvious that the preference we give to a certain direction
in our activity, to the exclusion of all others, arises not from reality, but from
an ideal. So, if this ideal is only an emanation of our empirical inconstant self;
if it is only an attribute of our effective or virtual feelings, it too becomes a
transitory attribute, an instantaneous phenomenon. How can it claim the
right to rule an act that is about to happen, when it might itself be no more
when the act is about to begin? Thus one thing arises out of two: either our
will can content itself with an ideal which coincides with the act, which is
born and dies with it, like the will of impulsive or insane people, or, on the
contrary, it will demand of it its rights, through which the ideal will be
imposed upon it, for the future as well as the immediate present, which means
that it will demand it to have some stability before allowing it the right to rule
over it. Then we will no longer be in the realm of the empirical self and pure
experience, since a stable ideal is the very definition of moral law. A law is never
a product of experience, but an object of demonstration, or of faith.
'Experience' which makes authority 'moral': is this not a contradiction in
terms?
Conclusion
It has now been demonstrated with clear evidence that both doctrines only
retain one aspect of moral truth. Their common mistake is more in their
exclusivism and their reciprocal negation than in their positive position. 
OBLIGATION 61
So, that which happened to the theory of knowledge has now happened to
. practical philosophy. Idealism or realism, rationalism or empiricism, and so
many other philosophical schools of thought, are only in opposition because
each has insisted on one necessary condition of human knowledge, holding
it to be the sufficient condition and total cause, when it is only one element
among many others. On one hand, neither logical concept, nor scientific law,
nor the sum total of all known concepts and laws, can ever meet and define
the concrete object completely, which is the point at which they come
together, but which is infinitely beyond them. On the other hand, any real
object will remain completely irrelevant and inaccessible to us if it is not
subsumed into the forms and laws of our mind. In other words, if prime
principles and general laws exempted us absolutely from confronting them
with reality; if reality had nothing more, offered us no new aspect, the world
would become undifferentiated, indiscernible; it would be without life,
without history or dimensions. If, conversely, there were no acquired truth
and established law, the mind would cease to be itself: it would lose its
structural unity, disintegrate and would have no hold on human nature. In
the same way, from a practical point of view, if a scientist always had to start
everything again from the beginning, no progress would be possible, and the
edifice of truth would never be built. It is when idea and object, form and
matter, hypothesis and experience, come together, that the spark of true
knowledge ignites.
And so it is with morality. Neither the abstract formulation of a general
rule, nor the painstaking analysis of a particular situation, made separately
from one another, would ever be enough to guide our will. As we saw earlier, it
is the synthesis of a universal ideal coming from above and an actual reality,
which is only a means of clarification, that provide an excellent guide for our
conscience. Like a hyphen between the ideal and the real, between the
absolute and the relative, the human conscience must always bring these two
terms together, by establishing such an agreement between them that the act
which is born from their happy marriage is imbued with these two
characteristics: it represents both the stability of eternal law and the novelty of
artistic creation.
Is this not the very conception of obligation such as it is defined in the
precepts of the Qur' an?
be mindful of Alliih, as much as you can. 64:16
Can we not immediately see the characteristic feature which distinguishes
this formulation from the others? It does not say: do what seems good to you,
according to the inspiration of the moment; it is not that of a rigid tyrannical
duty which does not admit of exception or modification. It is neither the one nor
the other; yet it responds to both of their deep tendencies. In these concise
and lucid terms, the Qur'an invites us to turn our eyes towards heaven, whilst 
62 THE MORAL WORWOFTHEQUR'AN
supporting us with the solid foundations of reality. In this way the two ends of
the chain are linked: ascension towards the ideal, while safeguarding human
nature; submission to the law and freedom of the self.
But, you say, can this be possible? Won't these two opposing terms clash
together again? From the moment that each individual is allowed to
determine his duty in relation to his particular situation, is he not also allowed
to relate it to his most capricious notions and undermine the authority of the
commandment?
Not at all. For the conscience which the Qur'an addresses is not the empty,
brute conscience which has been left without any other guidance than its
primitive instinct, as attributed by Rousseau to his natural man; nor is it the
conscience of a fictional self, like Kant's transcendental self. It is a conscience
which joins together two conditions that are absent from others. Firstly, it is
enlightened by a positive teaching wherein duties are clearly defined and
ranked. It is, furthermore, confronted with a living reality which is greatly
venerated. In other words, it is the conscience of a believer. Now the characteristic of this conscience is that it contains within itself the personality of its
legislator, who is always ready to be consulted. It cannot, therefore, surrender
itself to considerations which it recognises to be illegitimate in the eyes of the
author of the law, without betraying itself.
Here is an example: God says to me: 'Do this unless you cannot; do not do
this unless you are compelled by necessity'; and He also warns me against
secret yearnings which might tempt me to transgress the commandment, on
the pretext offalse necessity.128 In these circumstances, can I justify myselfby
considering a little disturbance to be an obstacle, or some mild intimidation to
be a force of necessity, when I know that it is not what God meant by these
words?
Of course, God does not always respond to me explicitly in doubtful cases;
He may not even suggest the same positive or negative solution to all of us.
There will always be opportunities for me to commit an error of interpretation
or of definition. This eventuality is a natural consequence of my human
condition and of the freedom granted to me by this very condition. In a
doubtful case, what is essential for me, as a believer, is to strive to discern and
follow faithfully what might be God's recommendation, considering the
entirety of all His rules. If my solution is wrong, then I shall not be held guilty
if I have made the necessary effort, which is my own, to enlighten myself. 129
That in doubtful cases everyone is obliged to refer to his own conscience
and abide by its response is what the Prophet, inspired by the Qur'an, 130 told us
in his famous words, some of which are as follows: 'The purely licit and the
purely illicit have been made clear; but between the two are unclear cases. He
who restrains himself when in doubt has saved his faith and honour.' 131 'Avoid
that which throws you into doubt; choose that which does not trouble you;
truth is peace; falsehood leads to suspicion.'132 When asked to give a definition
of good and evil, the Prophet answered: 'Ask your heart, consult your 
OBLIGATION 63
conscience; good is what gives peace to the soul and the heart; evil is that
which troubles the soul and makes the heart palpitate, whatever men may say
and whatever they may offer you.'133
But, you object, apart from such doubtful cases, which are relatively rare, if
the law has determined everything, the individual conscience will not have
any part left to play in the institution of duty. We would say that is true if a
rule were never able to direct all the individuals that it governs, to plan for
each individual all the cases which it has to solve, and for every case to
provide a concrete image of the unanimous verdict that agrees with the other
rules. In other words, it would be true if there were only one way of
understanding a rule, one single way of applying it and of bringing it in
agreement with the others. It is not any of these points of view.
Even if we suppose that the first point is resolved, we will easily see that the
most precise rule that one can formulate inevitably comprises some
undetermined aspect. Between the undetermined and the determined there
lies a whole gamut of options, not only for the free choice of a psychological
conscience, but also for the intelligent evaluation of the moral conscience,
since the distinctive features of any singular act are neither all to be ignored
nor all to be considered; most of the time they have both characteristics,
either in succession according to the case, or simultaneously, according to the
point of view at which one is placed. It therefore requires an individual effort
and a special tact to appredate them for their proper value and to choose those
which are the most essential.
Far from constituting a privilege reserved only for specialists capable of
being jurists, the recourse to individual effort, to ensure that one's duty is in
conformity with the objective reality, is a universal duty, incumbent upon the
most ignorant man, as well as the most competent. It becomes necessary as
soon as a moral concept is transformed into a moral action. just as a
magistrate must verify for every case that he examines whether it really is a
case anticipated by the formula of a certain law or a certain system of laws,
so each one of us is obliged to judge for ourselves whether the action we
intend to carry out satisfies the requirements of the rule. 134 For example, let
us take the moral rule which commands us to provide for the needs of
orphans. This rule does not indicate to us the weight, measure, kind, or
quality of care deemed sufficient and suitable for every circumstance. In the
same way, the ritual rule which commands the faithful to turn towards a
particular direction to pray does not instruct us to mark out an arrow
indicating the right direction every time we travel. The juridical rule that
prescribes that a judge can only allow as witnesses people who are honest
and just does not inform him of a person's righteousness and sincerity. This
indetermination, this inevitable silence of a rule, this distance between
concept and reality, is the most eloquent solicitation addressed to our
conscience to continue the legislative work which the law has started. We
must even pursue this work until all ambiguity is removed, in such a way 
64 THE MORAL WORID OF THE QUR'AN
that everyone can say: this is my duty with this specific action and not any
other. It is therefore at the point where the task determined by the law ends,
and with that the constraint of its authority, that the task of the individual
in the exercise of his liberty begins. We can even go further. If we place
ourselves at the actual point of view from which it was determined, we must
acknowledge that a rule is never made in order to shackle our freedom, but
somehow to increase it. Instead of allowing our thoughts to be scattered
across all the possible meanings in the search for wise rulings, the advantage
of having an established rule is firstly to spare us from stumbling and thus
diminishing the chance of making an error. Moreover, the very fact that it
provides a framework for our activity only increases it in power and
effectiveness, not unlike a stream which is dug up and its banks
strengthened. What our freedom might have lost in extension, it gains in
depth, in the search for the best ways of performing a duty.
But there is not just one duty. Besides the complexity and the perpetual
changing of the conditions of life, there is the multiplicity and interaction of
moral precepts. It is precisely in the confrontation between these two fields
that the most extensive terrain opens up to our freedom. To prove this point,
let us borrow one example from the rules of a game.
We know that in the game of chess, for example, the progression of each
piece is simple and follows a strictly defined rule. Can it be said, however, that
the strictness of the rule paralyses the freedom of the player? On the contrary,
it is well known that any chess player can produce an infinite number of
moves, to such a degree that no two games are identical. The most interesting
aspect of this comparison is that each player's originality consists much less in
his way of applying the rule to move a piece, than in the way in which he
commands the strikes, co-ordinates the moves and combines forces. This is
where the genius of a player is revealed, in the intuition by which he discovers
in a labyrinth the shortest, safest route to the exit.
Something analogous happens in the moral order: among the tasks that I
am called to fulfil, there are those which are prescribed for me to do daily,
others which are periodic or circumstantial, others for which the occasion
might arise only once in a lifetime. My body, my mind, my family, my
homeland, each of my attachments requires an action determined by a rule.
However, when I get up in the morning, I can organise a timetable of tasks in
different ways and set out the itinerary in order to put them into action.
During the given lapse of time, I can integrate a various number of good
works, perform one to a higher degree of perfection than the others,
accomplish one as early or as late as possible, content myself with ordinary
forms of doing good or strive to create something new, of greater value. It is
not just one single gesture which must be considered as a quite ingenious
synthesis of numerous duties. In such a way, everyone may freely compose an
original page of their moral life, whilst respecting the general rules of this
human art. How could anyone demand more freedom, with the intention of 
OBLIGATION 65
breaking this framework, without aspiring to perversity or madness? This is
what any legislative wisdom worthy of its name must spare us, by sketching
out the outlines of our behaviour. What it must not do - or else it risks
violating our natural right and reducing us to servile, mechanical obedience -
is interfere in the detail of our oeuvres, which by nature we wish to construct,
each one as he pleases.
The part which we are to play in legislating on our obligations is from then
on well defined. The rules of the law are not created by us; we have them
already made, implicitly or explicitly, by our Legislator. We construct the
definition of our concrete duties from these ideals to the extent of our
capability. Such is the reasonable and conciliatory position of moral obligation
which the Qur'an takes. It situates man in his right place and in conditions
which suit him exactly, between nature and pure spirit. When Bergson
thought that he had found two types of ethics, one of obligation, the other of
creation, he was only artificially separating two indissoluble elements of the
one and same reality. True morality is neither pure submission, nor absolute
invention; it is both together. It is not the attitude of a slave or of an absolute
master, but that of a citizen, participating in some way in the authority of the
law, by the choice and initiative which are his rights.
Who could add or subtract something from this, without finding excess or
deficiency? Until now, we have only established a kind of compromise
between the legislator and the acting person, in virtue of which each one of
them supplies one part of the definition of concrete duty. The subject's
participation in legislative power appears to be a kind of co-operation based
upon the division of work; a kind of co-operation where two actions complete
each other without any violation, and the two collaborators remain separate
from each other, only meeting half-way. In reality, it is greater and better than
that. On one hand, by adhering to the sacred law, our conscience assimilates it,
upholds it, makes it its own, as if it participated in the creation of eternal
truths. On the other hand, when we synthesise different established rules,
adjusting them to our situation, we do not do so in the absence of a master,
but under his patronage, his care and control. We are always inspired by him, as
if he still continued within us his role as legislator, down to the minutest
detail. From this one can say that here, between the agent and author of the
law, there is not only collaboration, but union. One could say a fusion of two
wills.
Which is it, among the earthly philosophies, that has been able to achieve
such an intimate reconciliation between demands that are so diametrically
opposed? In our opinion, only a system of religious ethics is capable of that
task, and it is precisely that which has been so eminently achieved in Qur'anic
ethics. 