Any moral doctrine worthy of the name is essentially based on the idea of obligation. This is its most fundamental basis, the pivot, the nucleus around which the whole ethical system revolves, whose absence would destroy the very essence and substance of practical wisdom. For, without obligation, there is no responsibility and without responsibility, there can be no return of justice, whence chaos, disorder and anarchy, not just de facto, but de jure, according to the so-called moral principle itself. 

One can see in which way certain modern theoreticians would like to lead us.How can one possibly conceive of a moral rule without an obligation? Is this not a contradiction in terms? Or are we to make the conscience a mere tool of artistic appreciation? Is it not evident that ethics and aesthetics are two distinct entities? In a most profound sense, it is true, anything which is good is beautiful. Is the opposite equally true? Certainly, the idea of virtue has its own intrinsic beauty which the soul can taste even though it may not be pleasing to the eye. But it is something more; by its very nature, it acts and motivates, it makes us want to act in order to make it a concrete reality. On the other hand, reduced to its most simple expression, the notion of beauty has nothing to do with action, especially when its object does not depend on our will. Thus our admiration for divine omnipotence, or for the majesty of the celestial vault, does not induce us to create copies of them. Even when an artist conceives an idea for a great project that he can execute, this idea does not absolutely force him to carry it out, it gently invites him to execute it when he wants to and when he is at leisure to do so. Or even if it imposes itself upon some, it does not impose itself upon others with equal compulsion. In any case, far from going against feelings, it expresses them. Furthermore, although a fault within a work of art may well shock the senses, it will not offend the conscience. It is not something immoral. 

On the contrary, moral good is characterized by this imperative authority over everyone, by this necessity that compels everyone to carry out the same order, whatever might be the state of their actual feelings; a necessity which makes disobedience seem odious and abominable. We shall see later in which form the Qur'an presents this necessity, which it calls camr: imperative, kitaba: prescription and fana: duty. Now that we have stated the principle of obligation and nominally defined it, we must delve deeper into the knowledge of its nature, by examining its sources, its characteristics and its antimonies. 

The sources of moral obligation In his in-depth analysis of moral obligation, the French philosopher Henri Bergson was able to discover two sources: one, the force of social pressure; the other, the force of human, or rather, divine, attraction. 

He explains that to play the role that is assigned to us by society, to follow the route that it has traced for us and to which we abandon ourselves daily through a kind of habit upon which we scarcely reflect, which imitates the instinct of a bee or an ant, is what one ordinarily calls 'carrying out one's duty'. Were we to resist it for an instant and be tempted to modify the prescribed route, we would somehow be led back to it because of the overbearing pressure of collective life. It is altogether different in its second aspect. Although the morality of the crowd is the effect of a collective constraint, that of the privileged is an aspiration towards the ideal. It is a rapture of creative love, which tends not only to orient the conduct of the individual towards a higher direction, but also to bring society along with him and lead it, rather than be led by it. As a description and analysis of a given phenomenon of experience, one can say that the Bergsonian exposition has not omitted much that is essential; as a theory of moral obligation, however, this analysis presents certain difficulties and differs in some respects from the Qur'anic point of view. 

Already, with respect to the description, one could ask - since it concerns the designation of all the forces that act upon the will - why it is that a third factor is not indicated, one more ancient and more deeply rooted in human nature, namely the individual or living element? For what really matters to every fellow citizen is not just to conform to what society dictates and to behave like a cell within an organism, but also, and above all, to seek his own preservation, independently, even at the expense of the group to which he belongs. This we turn to below. 

What is of greater concern in this analysis is that the two terms moral and obligation seem to us to contradict each other, for, from the moment that an obligation becomes a semi-instinctive constraint, it loses its moral qualification; conversely, spontaneous love is the very opposite of obligation. Strictly speaking, true morality is not found here at all, neither in one case nor the other. Man is always presented to us as the toy of conflicting forces: sometimes pushed by instinct, sometimes carried away by emotion, never an independent personality capable of comparing, appreciating and choosing. Now, in order to establish morality, it is not enough for the ideal to present itself to us as the objective of an exalted aspiration, nor for the social imperative to appear as a tyrannical tax. Both must undergo a genuine process in the conscience from which they emerge newly fashioned, based on justice, corroborated and prescribed by reason. As long as the ideal is not invested with this imperative and reasonable disposition, and even when it does not act to pursue a mirage or a fleeting dream, it will remain determined by a certain idea of beauty. This feeling, however noble it may be, is not a moral principle. 

It is the same with any unjustified submission that proceeds from a kind of collective intimidation. This is why we see the Qur'an constantly protesting against these two enemies of morality: the pursuit of impetuous desire and blind conformity. Do not those who wish to continue a tradition without any understanding do so even though their fathers used to walk in ignorance and error?6 Thus, essential elements that have been omitted from Bergson's analysis have left an immense lacuna: a rational element, a properly moral element in the agent and another in the commandment: intelligence, freedom and legitimacy. He has greatly underestimated the representative role of the intellectual faculty, 'the last in line'; he has greatly insisted upon the little effectiveness it offers in the war against passion, but even so, the very essence of morality resides in the reflective activity of the soul. 

In spite of certain errors in the way that he presented his theory, Kant was more correct in claiming to have discovered the source of moral obligation in the highest faculty of the human soul, independent of both inclination and the outside world; he writes: Duty, a sublime and great word ... what origin is worthy of thee and where is the root of thy noble stem to be found ... ? It can be nothing less than that which elevates man above himself ... that which links him to an order of things that the understanding alone can conceive. Belonging both to the intelligible and the sensible worlds, man therefore has a dual nature wherein the nobler (reason) commands the lesser (unfounded selflove). The voice of reason is so clear, 'so insistent, so perceptible for even the grossest of men . . . the boundaries between morality and self-love are so clearly and exactly delimited that even the most ordinary perception cannot fail to know whether something belongs to the one or the other.'Thus reduced to its most simple expression, free of any formalist or transcenentalist subtlety and purified as well of a radical pessimism and certain coldness, the Kantian doctrine is not only incontestable, but we believe that it can also be regarded as similar to the Qur'anic doctrine. 

This book teaches us that the human soul has received the knowledge of good and evil in its primal structure.As well as the faculties of language and the external senses, man is endowed with moral awareness;he already knows the two paths of virtue and vice. It is true that the soul commands to evil, but man is also capable of mastering his inclinations; and for he who controls his faculties and restrains his desires, Paradise will be his home. Even if not everyone exercises such influence upon himself there are nevertheless those who do so with God's help. 'Whenever God wants good for someone', so the Prophet has told us, 'he raises within that person's inner heart a counsellor who exhorts him to act or to abstain.' There is therefore an internal force within man, which can not only advise him and clarify his choice, but which, properly speaking, can also command him to act or not to act. What is this inner authority that claims the right to give orders to our lower faculties, if it is not the enlightened part of our soul, which is reason. Furthermore, the Qur'an says so in its own words, when it articulates the following alternative concerning the unbelievers: Do they follow the command of their reason, or is it that they are an unjust people? 72:32 This verse states the third principle which has been excluded from ethics. 

There is no other justified rule of conduct other than the commandment of reason. It is therefore the sole legitimate authority. 